The Project Gutenberg eBook of Selections from Viri Romae
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Selections from Viri Romae

Author: C. F. L'Homond

Editor: Robert Arrowsmith
        Charles Knapp

Release date: August 1, 2010 [eBook #33311]
                Most recently updated: January 6, 2021

Language: English, Latin

Credits: Produced by Louise Hope, Juliet Sutherland and the Online
        Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SELECTIONS FROM VIRI ROMAE ***




Produced by Louise Hope, Juliet Sutherland and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net






[This text is intended for users whose text readers cannot use the
"real" (Unicode/UTF-8) version of the file. The main difference is that
letters with macron ("long" mark) are shown instead with circumflex
accents:

  âêîôû ÂÊÎÔÛ

Long y (rare) is unmarked in the body text, and shown as y: in the
Glossary. The circumflex accent in its own right does not occur.

There is no Greek in this book.

Boldface text is shown with #marks#, sans-serif type (only in the
Advertising) with =marks=, and italics with _lines_.

The text as printed includes several hundred cross-references to
footnotes, numbered from 1 on each page, and to lines of text, numbered
continuously within each selection. Each selection is therefore given
twice, in "stripped" and "as printed" forms.

In the complete form, all page numbers and line breaks have been
retained. Words split across line or page breaks may appear on either
the first or second line, depending on space. Footnote anchors are shown
in [brackets], page numbers in [[double brackets]] on separate lines,
and line numbers in {braces} at the end of the line. The printed line
numbers use multiples of five; in the e-text, some numbers have been
moved up or down when required by line length.

The stripped form gives the bare text, without macrons. Note that
selections XXVIII-XXX were edited; see first footnote to XXVIII.

The two large maps can be found in the "images" directory associated
with the HTML version of this text, under the names frontis_large.jpg
and foldout_large.jpg. Map thumbnails and the other illustrations--
mainly line drawings-- are in the same place.]




    [Illustration {map of Italian peninsula}]




  SELECTIONS

  from

  VIRI ROMAE


  Edited By

  ROBERT ARROWSMITH, Ph.D.

  Late Professor Of Greek And Latin, Teachers College

  and

  CHARLES KNAPP, Ph.D.

  Instructor In Latin, Barnard College


    [Decoration]


  New York ·:· Cincinnati ·:· Chicago

  AMERICAN BOOK COMPANY




  Copyright, 1896, by
  AMERICAN BOOK COMPANY.

  VIRI ROMAE.

  W. P. 18




PREFACE

[Decoration]


Upon the reviving perception of the true scope of Latin teaching has
followed a return to some of the methods of former times, which, with
all their faults, were yet imbued with the true spirit of the Classics.
Since for many years the study of Latin lay in bondage to the spirit
which regarded the language merely as a _corpus vile_ for grammatical
dissection, and ignored the rich literature lying beyond the classical
trinity of authors, it is not surprising that it fell into disfavor as
unsuited to the requirements of the times. The revival upon which the
study has now entered is due largely to a recognition of the fact that
mental culture rather than mere mental training is its true aim, and
that, with this aim kept steadily in view, the study of Latin is not a
barren waste of time and energy, but a most potent agency in securing
that broad and sympathetic culture which must ever remain the mark of
the educated man. The results of classical study most valuable to the
character are surely not to be found in the ability, usually lost
after a few years, to recite paradigms faultlessly, to give the
principal parts of verbs, and to enumerate the various kinds of
_cum_-constructions and the subdivisions of the ablative. Of far greater
worth are the mental breadth and sympathy, the weakening of prejudice
and Philistinism, and the increased power of entering into higher forms
of enjoyment which must inevitably flow from the study of the life of a
great people as revealed in its literature and art.

This conception of the sphere of Latin study has brought with it some
modifications of the initial steps and a return to some of the texts in
use fifty years since. In the traditional sequence of authors, and
particularly in the selection of a purely military work as the means by
which to introduce the student to the language, the entrance into the
fields of Latin literature has frequently been made so distasteful as to
destroy the desire for further exploration. More attractive paths,
however, are opening to the beginner; and of these the _Viri Romae_
offers in a notable degree material of real interest to the young, and,
from the very outset, gives a foretaste of the contents of the
literature.

The history of this work is of interest, as showing an early recognition
of the correctness of the standpoint to which we are now returning. It
was compiled by a Professor of the University of Paris, Charles François
Lhomond, who lived from 1727 to 1794, and enjoyed an enviable reputation
as a successful teacher, especially of younger pupils. His experience
taught him the need of an introductory text combining interest of story
with simplicity of style. The best proof of the excellence of his work
is the fact that it has ever since remained a favorite with teachers of
Latin. The material is taken from the works of various authors, chiefly
Livy and Eutropius, but was simplified by Lhomond in vocabulary and
construction wherever necessary to fit it to the requirements of
beginners. As its title indicates, it deals with the early stories of
Rome, so fascinating in any dress to the young, and it is therefore
eminently fitted to arouse a desire for further reading.

The present edition has been prepared with reference to the difficulties
most likely to embarrass the young pupil at the outset of the new study.
One of the most perplexing of these difficulties is the inability to
discover in an alphabetical vocabulary the inflected forms encountered
in the text. This is met, in part at least, by giving in italics in the
footnotes the vocabulary form of verbs not easily recognizable. For a
similar reason grammatical constructions are, on their first occurrence,
explained in simple language, or their nature briefly indicated, in
order that the student may more intelligently consult the grammatical
references which follow. For purposes of comparison, and as a means of
helping the pupil to form proper habits of study and observation,
subsequent occurrences are referred to previous instances, or to the
tables of constructions on pages xvi-xxvi.

Although the compiler of the _Viri Romae_ greatly simplified the
language of his authorities, there yet remain in the early part of the
book many constructions which the beginner is not fitted to discuss. It
is strongly recommended, therefore, that the treatment of the more
difficult and complex of these constructions be postponed to a later
period. At the outset the attention of the pupil should be centered upon
matters of primary importance and upon the simplest and most common
usages, such as the form of the sentence, the relation of its parts to
one another, the significance of terminations, and the modes of
expressing the constantly recurring relations of time, place, cause,
means, purpose, and result. Even these should be treated as simply as
possible and with constant regard to English usage. It is the experience
of many teachers that reference to a Latin grammar to explain a
construction possessed by English as well as by Latin frequently creates
a difficulty where the student, if left to his own devices, would have
experienced none.

The notes on matters of Roman custom have been made intentionally full
with the aim of adding reality to the stories, and of inducing the
pupil, under the teacher's guidance, to discover for himself further
details. The use of other accounts, whether in ancient or modern
authors, of photographs, plates, and other graphic aids can not be too
strongly encouraged, in accordance with the dictum of Horace:--

  Segnius irritant animos demissa per aures
  Quam quae sunt oculis subiecta fidelibus.

All vowels known to be long have been carefully marked. The text of this
edition is, in the main, that of C. Holzer (tenth edition, Stuttgart,
1889). In orthography, however, Brambach has been followed. In the
vocabulary compound verbs are given under the simple verbs as an aid to
the fuller appreciation of the methods by which they are formed and
their meanings derived. The exercises in prose composition have been
made simple in order that they may occupy their legitimate place as
subordinate and auxiliary to the development of the more important
reading power.

The thanks of the editors are due to Mr. E. G. Warner, of the Brooklyn
Polytechnic Institute, for his hearty coöperation in the work, and
particularly for the labor which he has expended upon the exercises.

  ROBERT ARROWSMITH.
  CHARLES KNAPP.

August, 1895.




CONTENTS

[Decoration]

  PAGE

  Suggestions to the Student                              ix
  Plan of Rome                                        xxviii
       I. Rômânî Imperiî Exôrdium                          1
      II. Rômulus                                          4
     III. Numa Pompilius                                   8
      IV. Tullus Hostîlius                                10
       V. Ancus Mârcius                                   15
      VI. Lûcius Tarquinius Prîscus                       17
     VII. Servius Tullius                                 19
    VIII. Tarquinius Superbus                             22
      IX. Iûnius Brûtus                                   25
       X. Mûcius Scaevola                                 26
      XI. Fabiî Trecentî Sex                              27
     XII. Lûcius Virgînius                                29
    XIII. Titus Mânlius Torquâtus                         30
     XIV. Pûblius Decius                                  35
      XV. Mânius Curius                                   36
     XVI. Gâius Duîlius                                   38
    XVII. Mârcus Atîlius Rêgulus                          39
   XVIII. Appius Claudius Pulcher                         42
     XIX. Quîntus Fabius Mâximus                          43
      XX. Aemilius Paulus et Terentius Varrô              48
     XXI. Pûblius Cornêlius Scîpio Âfricânus              52
    XXII. Tiberius Gracchus et Gâius Gracchus             63
   XXIII. Gâius Marius                                    68
    XXIV. Lûcius Cornêlius Sulla                          74
     XXV. Lûcius Lûcullus                                 77
    XXVI. Gnaeus Pompêius Mâgnus                          80
   XXVII. Gâius Iûlius Caesar                             86
  XXVIII. Mârcus Tullius Cicerô                           96
    XXIX. Mârcus Brûtus                                  102
     XXX. Octâviânus Caesar Augustus                     103
  Exercises for Translation                              112
  Vocabulary                                             131




SUGGESTIONS TO THE STUDENT

[Decoration]

To read Latin quickly and intelligently, and to enjoy the reading
properly, we must possess (1) a vocabulary, _i.e._ a collection of Latin
words with whose meanings, whether used singly or in combination, we are
thoroughly familiar; (2) a knowledge of the inflectional system of the
language, _i.e._ its declensions and conjugations; (3) a knowledge of
its syntax; and (4) a knowledge of the plan upon which the Latin
sentence is constructed, or, in other words, we must be able to overcome
the difficulties arising out of the peculiar order of the words and
clauses that form a Latin sentence.

#Vocabulary.#--Words are the material out of which sentences are
constructed. Hence it is of prime importance to know their meanings. The
best way, in fact the only way, to acquire a vocabulary, is by constant
reading, and by noting carefully the force of individual words as they
occur. It soon becomes evident that certain words are very frequently
used, especially verbs which denote actions that have to do with
everyday life, such as _dîcô_, _eô_, _faciô_, _habeô_, _veniô_, _sum_,
and their compounds. These at least must be mastered at the very outset.
It is worth while to notice what prefixes are used in forming compound
verbs, and the modifications of meaning which they produce. If the force
of the simple verb is mastered, a little practice will enable the
student to detect at sight the meaning of any of its compounds without
reference to any dictionary.

It is useful also to group together in memory words derived from the
same stem, _e.g._ _canô_, _cantus_; _certô_, _certâmen_; _dûcô_, _dux_;
_regô_, _rêx_, _rêgius_; _caedô_, _caedês_. A specially interesting
study consists in noting the English words which go back to Latin
originals. From various causes a large part of our English vocabulary is
borrowed from Latin. Cf. _donate_ with _dônô_ and _dônum_, _lucid_ with
_lûx_, _regent_ with _rêx_ and _regô_.

Finally, it will be found very helpful constantly to read Latin aloud,
for thus the _ear_ will help the _eye_ and words will have meaning when
_heard_ as well as when _seen_. Indeed, we ought to use our ears far
more than our eyes in acquiring a Latin vocabulary, in order that Latin
words, when heard, shall suggest at once to our minds the same pictures
which they suggested to the minds of Roman boys.

#Inflections and Syntax.#--It is not enough, however, to be familiar
with the meanings of individual words, however many we may succeed in
mastering. We must possess a knowledge also of _inflections_, _i.e._ of
the declensions and conjugations, which tell us how individual words may
be altered in form in order to express different relations to other
words, and of _syntax_, which tells us how words are combined together
into sentences. A knowledge of inflections and an understanding of
syntax are the tools by which we arrive at the meaning of sentences as a
whole. As the wise workman uses the best and most efficient tools, so
one who undertakes to read Latin with speed and pleasure must make his
mastery of inflections and syntax as complete as possible. It is assumed
that students of this book have already had some drill in the commoner
inflections. The principles of syntax can best be studied as they occur
in actual reading. The commonest, and therefore most important, are
discussed in the notes and illustrated by appropriate references to the
grammars in common use and by the tables of constructions on pages xvi
to xxvi. A very practical way of fixing the principles of syntax firmly
in mind is by frequent translation from English into Latin. It should be
remembered, however, that we study syntax simply because such study
enables us to read and enjoy the great works of Latin literature.

#The Order of Words.#--The greatest difficulty that confronts the
student of Latin literature is the fact that the order of the words in a
Latin sentence is widely different from that which he ordinarily finds
in an English sentence. This difference is due mainly to two causes.
(1) Every Latin sentence is a kind of word picture, in which the meaning
is developed stroke by stroke, _the separate parts being introduced in
the order of their importance_. (2) It is a principle of Latin to keep
the meaning in suspense until the very end, so that the last word
completes not only the form, but also the meaning of the sentence. Both
these principles may be seen at work in lines 1 to 5 of selection I,
page 1. _Proca_ naturally stands first, partly because the whole work is
a story of the deeds of men, partly because at this point he is
especially important, as being the reigning king, with power to choose
his own successor. The phrase _rêx Albânôrum_ very properly follows, as
defining the scene of the action. _Numitor_ and _Amûlius_ are next
mentioned because the Latin loves to emphasize contrasts of persons. The
sense of the whole is not complete till we reach the very last word,
_habuit_. In the next sentence _Numitôrî_ is first, because now Numitor
is more important, as being Proca's successor. The relative clause _quî
. . . erat_ not only states a fact, but also gives the reason why Proca
bequeathed his kingdom (_rêgnum relîquit_) to Numitor. So in the words
_ut . . . fêcit_, the _ut_-clause tells why Amulius performed the act
indicated by the words _Rhêam Silviam . . . fêcit_, so that by the time
we know _what_ the act was we know also exactly _why_ it was performed.
The Latin thus pictures the parts of the scene in their true order, for
the motive in every case precedes the act. We see therefore that,
however strange at times the Latin order may seem to be, there is always
good reason for it. It is our task at the outset, as it soon will be our
pleasure, to determine just what this reason is.

Now this freer order of words in the Latin sentence is rendered possible
by the fact that Latin possesses an elaborate inflectional system,
whereas English does not. Note, however, that one familiar with Latin
declensions would know at once that in the first sentence discussed
above Proca was actor (_i.e._ subject), and Numitor and Amulius acted
upon (_i.e._ object). So in the sentence _ut . . . fêcit_ it is clear
that Amulius is the actor and that Rhea Silvia is acted upon. Thus the
inflectional system serves to relieve, in part at least, the very
difficulty which it creates.

#How to Read.#--By far the best way for the beginner to make himself
familiar with the Latin order and its meaning is to _make a practice
from the very outset of reading the sentence aloud from beginning to end
before attempting to translate at all_. If the meaning is not clear at
once, a repetition of such reading will often serve to make it clear,
provided the student knows the force of the individual words and
constructions. If he does not, he must seek the aid of the vocabulary or
the notes. Then let him read the sentence once more aloud, slowly and
carefully. He should not, however, look into either vocabulary or notes
until he has read the Latin through at least once. Progress at first
will necessarily be slow, but it will be sure. By every page read in the
manner indicated above the pupil is preparing himself to read with more
and more intelligence and pleasure the pages that remain. Besides, in
this way he reads his Latin precisely as he reads English, word after
word, in the order in which it is written, and precisely as a Roman boy
1800 years ago read his Latin story or poem. He will gain further the
advantage of training his ear as well as his eye and of making it do its
fair share of the work. In translating, too, it will be wise to follow
as closely as possible the Latin order. Often it will be found that the
resulting English order, even if not very common, is none the less
intelligible. So the sentence _ut . . . fêcit_ discussed above may be
translated almost exactly in the Latin order.


LATIN COMPOSITION

#Its Value.#--An exercise which is very practical and helpful, and which
may also become extremely delightful, is the rendering into Latin of
English sentences based upon that portion of the Latin text which has
already been carefully studied. This exercise is helpful, because it
calls upon us to put into practice the knowledge which we have acquired
in reading; it may become delightful because it shows us accurately the
measure of our advance and thus affords us the pleasure which comes from
the feeling that one is making sure progress in a given line of study.

#Essentials.#--To write Latin well one needs precisely the things which
we found necessary in reading (page ix). The words and constructions
required in the sentences for translation given on pages 112 to 129 are
illustrated by the corresponding pages of the Latin text. The pupil
should always endeavor to recall the word, inflectional form, phrase, or
construction for himself before referring to his text or to his grammar.
In other words, he should make the exercise one of thought rather than
of mere mechanical copying from a printed model.

#The Object.#--We read the Latin text in order to understand the
thoughts of the writer. So in turning English sentences into Latin our
chief object is to clothe the _thoughts_ which such sentences convey in
proper Latin dress, not merely to substitute Latin _words_ for English
_words_. Every language has its own peculiar expressions, which are
called _idioms_. Such expressions can never be literally translated from
one language into another. Hence in attempting to turn an English
sentence into Latin, we must begin by noting carefully the thought which
it expresses, and then consider how the Romans gave expression to that
thought.

#Choice of Expression.#--In Latin, just as in English, it often happens
that the same thought may be expressed in several ways, which differ
greatly in the words used as well as in the form and expression. In
English it is often impossible to give a reason for the choice of one
form of expression in preference to others. Sometimes the choice is made
consciously for the sake of variety, or because there is a very slight
shade of difference in meaning,--so slight that we can perhaps feel it,
but cannot put it into words; sometimes unconsciously, because every one
falls into the habit of using certain phrases and manners of speech with
no deeper reason than the habit. The same is true of Latin writers.
Their various forms of expression have been noted and collected, and we
find them laid down in the grammars as _rules_. Some of these
expressions are found to be used by the best writers more frequently
than others, and these are considered the best models. But the student
must avoid the error of confining himself absolutely to one iron-bound
form because most stress is laid upon it by the grammars, if he finds
other modes of expression in the writings of good authors. By searching
out the greatest variety of forms in which an idea may be expressed, by
trying to discover the differences in meaning between them, and by
placing yourself as far as possible in the writer's place, you will gain
a far greater grasp and appreciation of the language than by learning a
single rigid rule and forcing it to fit every case.

One of the central ideas of the following exercises, then, should be to
render the thought in as many ways as possible, drawing your authority
from the text on which the exercise is based, as well as from your
grammar.

Examine the tables on pages xvi to xxvi, where you will find several of
the most important constructions treated. Compare the examples given and
try to trace out the reasons for the different forms. In many cases you
will not be able to do so, and are free to choose one of several modes
of expression. In others the meaning of the sentences and the aid of the
grammar will give the reason for your choice.

#Caution.#--The pupil should note that all the words and constructions
necessary to enable him to write in Latin the sentences given below,
pages 112 to 129, are to be found on the pages of the Latin text upon
which the exercises are based. _An English-Latin vocabulary or
dictionary is, therefore, wholly unnecessary._ Additional sentences
based on the text may be made up by student or teacher as required.


TABLES OF CONSTRUCTIONS

The following tables have been prepared for the purpose of affording the
pupil material for study and comparison, by grouping together under
appropriate heads examples of certain constructions as they actually
occur in this book. It is expected that they will be helpful to the
student in two ways: (1) by supplementing and illustrating the notes,
and (2) by affording him guides which he may follow in his writing of
Latin. No attempt whatever has been made to include under any given head
all the examples that are to be found in the text. The pupil will find
it both interesting and instructive to add to the lists himself as he
finds new instances in his own reading.


_A._ EXPRESSIONS OF PLACE

1. PLACE AT OR NEAR WHICH:

  #Rômae#, VII, 26, and often; #Tarentî#, XV, 30; salûbriôra
  #mîlitiae# quam #domî# esse iuvenum corpora, IV, 70 (locative:
  chiefly used with names of towns);--#in siccô#, I, 10; #in iîs
  locîs#, I, 11; #in# (on) #sinistrîs manibus#, II, 21; #in colle
  Quirînâlî#, II, 54; #in ârâ#, III, 4; #in mediâ urbe#, V, 23; ponte
  . . #in# (over) #Tiberî# factô, #in# (at) #ôre# Tiberis, V,
  27;--#multîs locîs#, XXV, 17; #terrâ marîque#, XXI, 125;--#apud
  Tîcînum# amnem . . #apud Trebiam#, XIX, 16;--#ad# Caprae #palûdem#,
  II, 44; #ad# tertium #lapidem#, XIII, 12; #ad flûmen# Bagradam,
  XVII, 18.


_B._ EXPRESSIONS OF MOTION

1. PLACE FROM WHICH:

  #Curibus# . . accîtus est, III, 2; #Tarquiniîs# . . profectus, VI, 1
  (simple abl., especially with names of towns);--#â portâ# . .
  pergit, XIII, 5; #ab urbe# profectus, XIII, 13; #â lûdîs# pûblicîs
  revertêns, XVIII, 17;--dêlâbitur #ê caelô scissô# scûtum, III, 15;
  #ex eô locô# . . aufûgerat, IV, 20; dônec novae côpiae #ex Âfricâ#
  advenîrent, XVII, 3; #ex angustiîs# êvâsit, XIX, 38.

2. PLACE TOWARDS WHICH:

  #Albam# properâvit, I, 25; Quî cum #Rômam# vênisset, III, 3; #Rômam#
  also in IV, 64, V, 20, and often; Pergunt inde #Collâtiam#, VIII,
  21; Profectus #Delphôs#, IX, 4; #Carthâginem# rediit, XVII, 54;
  #domum# dêdûcunt, IV, 31; #domum# refugiêns, VII, 45; cum . .
  #domum# redîret, VII, 48 (simple accusative, chiefly with names of
  towns);--Cum lupa saepius #ad parvulôs# . . reverterêtur, I, 16;
  Remum . . #ad Amûlium# rêgem perdûxêrunt, I, 27; #ad Gabînôs# sê
  contulit, VIII, 4;--#in Âfricam# . . trâiêcit, XVII, 15; #in
  Îtaliam# vênit, XIX, 15; abiêcit #in Tiberim#, I, 7; Sabînôs #in
  urbem# recêpit, II, 38; aciem #in# (to) #collem# subdûxit, IV, 58;
  cum #in# (upon) #tribûnal# êscendisset, XII, 20; #In# (against)
  #eum# . . rediit, IV, 22; ausae sunt sê #inter têla# . . înferre,
  II, 36.

3. WAY BY WHICH:

  #portâ# (abl. of means) #quâ# profectî erant, XI, 19; #Per# (over)
  #loca alta# âgmen dûcêbat, XIX, 23; Quî cum . . #per montês, per
  silvâs# hûc illûc discurrerent, XIX, 35.


_C._ EXPRESSIONS OF TIME[I.1]

1. TIME AT WHICH:

  #Posterô diê#, IV, 61, VIII, 24; #Prîmô impetû#, II, 29; #Kalendîs
  Mârtiîs#, III, 20; #eâ tempestâte#, VI, 17; #nocte mediâ#, XIX, 68.

2. TIME WITHIN WHICH OR IN THE COURSE OF WHICH:

  #Annô trecentêsimô# ab urbe conditâ, XII, 1; #eôdem annô#, XIII, 11;
  #bellô Latînô#, XIV, 11; #hôc bellô#, XIV, 12; #in proeliô#, VI, 26;
  #In proeliô quôdam, in quô#, VII, 8; #In quô bellô#, XV, 2.[I.2]

3. AGE:

  fîlium #tredecim annôrum#, VI, 25; Hannibal . . #novem annôs nâtus#,
  XIX, 1.

    [Footnote I.1: See also below, Ablative Absolute, _K_ 3.]

    [Footnote I.2: The form with #in# is the more exact.]


_D._ DURATION OF TIME AND EXTENT OF SPACE

1. DURATION OF TIME:

  Rômulus #septem# et #trîgintâ# rêgnâvit #annôs#, III, 38; rêgnâvit
  #annôs duôs# et #trîgintâ#, IV, 75; rêgnâvit #annôs quattuor# et
  #quadrâgintâ#, VII, 52; #per tôtum bîduum#, XIII, 87; #omnî deinde
  vîtâ#, XIII, 60. (This last form should not be imitated.)

2. EXTENT OF SPACE:

  Iam #aliquantum# spatiî . . aufûgerat, IV, 20; centum et vîgintî
  #pedês# longum, XVII, 27; quînque diêrum #iter# . . abest, XXI, 163.


_E._ EXPRESSIONS OF PURPOSE

1. Pure purpose: #ut# or #nê# with the subjunctive:

  #ut# eum subole #prîvâret#, I, 3; #ut# populum ferum religiône
  #mîtigâret#, III, 3; #ut esset# index pâcis et bellî, III, 25;--#nê#
  fûrtô auferrî #posset#, III, 16; #nê# duo violenta ingenia
  mâtrimôniô #iungerentur#, VII, 38.

2. Relative clause:

  mîsit #quî# societâtem . . #peterent#, II, 5; Centum . . êlêgit,
  #quôrum# cônsiliô omnia #ageret#, II, 40; sacerdôtês lêgit, #quî#
  ancîlia . . #cûstôdîrent# et . . #ferrent#, III, 19; Rômam missus,
  #ubi# (= ut ibi) . . #interesset#, XXVIII, 8.

3. #Quô#[I.3] (whereby) with subjunctive:

  #quô frequentius habitârêtur#, IV, 66 (see note); #quô minor# turba
  Rômae #foret#, XVIII, 21; #quô diûtius# in magistrâtû #esset#,
  XIX, 46.

4. Gerundive:

  coniugî dedit #êducandôs#, I, 19; îgnem . . perpetuô #alendum#
  virginibus dedit, III, 4; agellum #colendum# locâvit, XVII, 36; #ad
  exercitum lûstrandum#, II, 44; mîlitês #ad vindicandum# facinus
  accendit, XII, 26.

5. Future participle:

  quasi dê pâce #âctûrus#, rê vêrâ ut tempus extraheret, XVII, 2 (see
  note).

6. Supine:

  aquam . . #petîtum# ierat, II, 17; ê suîs ûnum . . mittit
  #scîscitâtum#, VIII, 8; Cum . . lêgâtî Rômam vênissent #conquestum#,
  XIII, 81; pecora . . quae #pâstum# prôpulsa essent, XIX, 63.

7. Substantive clauses:

  adfîrmâns . . Rômulum . . praecipere #ut# sêditiônibus #abstinêrent#
  et rem mîlitârem #colerent#, II, 51-53; Latînôrum populîs suâsit
  #ut# . . fânum Diânae . . in Aventînô monte #aedificârent#, VII, 25;
  optâvit #ut# frâter . . #revîvîsceret# atque iterum classem
  #âmitteret#, XVIII, 19; êdîxit #nê# quis . . in hostês #pûgnâret#,
  XIII, 42; Veritus autem #nê# . . poenâs #daret#, XVI, 21; petiit â
  patribus cônscrîptîs #nê# quid dê eâ rê #statuerent#, XIII, 83.

    [Footnote I.3: This is merely a special form of (2), but its
    importance entitles it to separate treatment.]


_F._ EXPRESSIONS OF RESULT

1. Pure result: #ut# or #ut nôn# with the subjunctive:

  ita omnium animôs eâ pietâte imbuit #ut# fidês . . cîvês
  #continêret#, III, 33; adeô frâctî . . sunt spîritûs . . #ut# nûllî
  reî posthâc nisi sacrîs operam #daret#, IV, 72; ita eôs adliciêns
  #ut# apud omnês plûrimum #posset#, VIII, 6.

Note that in the main clause there is usually some word like #ita#,
#adeô#, #tam#, #tâlis#, #is#, which paves the way for the result clause.

2. Relative (characteristic):

  invenîrî potuit nêmô, #quî . . peteret#, XXIII, 119; Ûnus adulêscêns
  fuit, #quî audêret# querî, XXIV, 50. Here too belongs #quîn# with
  the subjunctive: haud procul erat #quîn . . âgnôsceret#, I, 33; nôn
  esse dubium #quîn . . oportêret#, XVI, 27; Nêminî dubium est #quîn
  . . restituerit#, XIX, 105.

3. Substantive:

  (Rômulus dîxit) #futûrum ut# omnium gentium dominî #exsisterent#,
  II, 53; #oportet# dîsciplînam, quam solvistî, . . #restituâs#, XIII,
  54; #concessum est ut# . . praecinente tîbîcine â cênâ #redîret#,
  XVI, 16.


_G._ TEMPORAL CLAUSES[I.4]

1. #Ubi#, #ut#, or #postquam# with the indicative mood, especially the
perfect tense:

  #Ubi# spectâculî tempus #vênit#, II, 11; #Ut . . increpuêre# arma
  micantêsque #fulsêre# gladiî, IV, 13; Is #postquam adolêvit#, VII,
  7; Quî #postquam# frequentês #convênêre#, XIII, 52.

2. #Dum# (while) with the indicative (the tense employed is generally
the present):

  Ea rês #dum# Numitôris animum anxium #tenet#, I, 36; #dum# Albânus
  exercitus #inclâmat# Cûriâtiîs, IV, 23; Latînus #dum# ad Tiberim
  #dêscendit#, sacerdôs bovem immolâvit, VII, 34.

3. #Dum#, #dônec# (until) with the subjunctive:

  #dum convalêsceret# (indirect discourse also), VII, 17; ut tempus
  extrâheret, #dônec# novae côpiae ex Âfricâ #advenîrent#, XVII,
  3 (partly purpose).

4. #Antequam# and #priusquam# with the subjunctive:

  Alterum . . #priusquam# tertius #posset# cônsequî, interfêcit, IV,
  24; #priusquam# eîs bellum #indîceret#, lêgâtum mîsit quî rês
  repeteret, V, 7; petiit . . nê quid . . statuerent #antequam# ipse
  #înspexisset# Macedonum . . causam, XIII, 83 (indirect discourse).

5. #Cum# with the imperfect or pluperfect subjunctive:

  #cum# iîs #însidiâtî essent# latrônês, I, 22; #cum# Numitor . .
  #comparâret#, I, 30; #cum# (as) Rômae #appropinquârent#, II, 15; cum
  (while) . . côntiônem . . #habêret#, II, 44; Quî #cum# Rômam
  #vênisset#, III, 2. This form of temporal clause is extremely
  common.

    [Footnote I.4: Cf. also Ablative Absolute, _K_ 3.]


_H._ CAUSAL CLAUSES[I.5]

1. Relative clause with the subjunctive:

  quîppe #quî cerneret# ferrum ante oculôs micâns, accûsâtiônem
  dîmîsit, XIII, 8; cum in eam cîvitâtem animadvertere dêcrêvisset
  #quae# (= cum ea) sibi #adversâta fuisset#, XXVII, 37.

2. #Cum# with the subjunctive:

  #Cum# vêrô uxôrês . . nôn #habêrent#, lêgâtôs circâ vîcînâs gentês
  mîsit, II, 3; #cum# sê invidiôsum . . #vidêret#, Vêientês . .
  adversus Rômânôs concitâvit, IV, 55; #Cum# . . facinora clandestîna
  #fierent#, Ancus carcerem . . aedificâvit, V, 21-25.

3. #Quod#,[I.6] #quia#, #quoniam#, or #quandô#, with the indicative:

  #quia# tribus impâr #erat#, . . fugam capessîvit, IV, 18;
  #quandôquidem . . pûgnâvistî#, XIII, 53; #quia# nôn #pâruistî#,
  XIII, 77.

4. #Quod# with the subjunctive:

  cum sê invidiôsum apud cîvês vidêret, #quod# bellum ûnô paucôrum
  certâmine #fînîsset#, IV, 55-56 (see note); Tarquinius fîlium . .
  #quod# in proeliô hostem #percussisset#, praetextâ . . dônâvit, VI,
  25-27.

5. #Quasi# with the subjunctive (assumed reason):

  eum accûsantês, #quasi# Numitôris agrôs înfêstâre #solitus esset#,
  I, 28; Is cum îrâtus ad mortem dûcî iussisset mîlitem, #quasi#
  (because, as was supposed,) #interfêcisset# commîlitônem, XIII, 65.

NOTE.--These clauses resemble those in 4, as giving the reason ascribed
to some one other than the writer. They show also that the reason is
fictitious, and invented by the person who advances it.

    [Footnote I.5: Cf. also Ablative Absolute, _K_ 4.]

    [Footnote I.6: These conjunctions are regularly used with the
    indicative. They are employed with the subjunctive only when the
    writer is indirectly quoting the reason given by some one else.]


_I._ CONCESSIVE OR ADVERSATIVE CLAUSES

1. #Cum# (although) with the subjunctive:

  #cum retinêrêtur# â propinquîs et amîcîs, tamen Carthâginem rediit,
  XVII, 53.

2. #Quamquam# with the indicative:

  #quamquam . . pellêbâtur#, XXI, 242.

3. #Quamvîs# with the subjunctive:

  #quamvîs sîs# molestus, XXVI, 158.


_J._ CUM CLAUSES

The temporal, causal, and concessive uses of #cum# have already been
given separately. #Cum# was originally a temporal conjunction. From the
temporal idea were developed its other meanings. So the English _when_
frequently contains the ideas of time and cause, or time and concession
combined, and _while_ also is frequently at once temporal and
concessive. So #cum# also may represent these ideas in combination as
well as separately. In many cases, indeed, it is difficult, if not
impossible, to decide which meaning is more prominent: cf.

  #Cum# (_when_ and _since_) lupa saepius ad parvulôs . .
  #reverterêtur#, I, 16; Hîs artibus #cum# (_when_ and _although_)
  Hannibalem Fabius . . #clausisset#, ille . . sê expedîvit, XIX, 31.


_K._ THE ABLATIVE ABSOLUTE

1. FORM.--The ablative absolute consists usually of a noun and a
participle. The participle is generally passive, but often active: #Eô
rêgnante#, IV, 3; #relâbente flûmine#, I, 9.

2. Often, however, the ablative absolute consists of a noun and
adjective, or of two nouns, or a noun and pronoun. In such cases there
is an ellipsis of the lost present participle of #sum#:

  #mâgnâ glôriâ# bellî, IV, 75; #parî# ferê #ôrnâtû#, X, 6; #Appiô
  iûdice#, XII, 15; #Valeriô# et #Cossô cônsulibus#, XIV, 1.

3. MEANING.--The ablative absolute may denote

  TIME; compare Temporal Clauses, _G_ 1, 2, and 5.

  #pulsô frâtre#, rêgnâvit, I, 3; #Eâ rê côgnitâ#, parvulôs . .
  abiêcit in Tiberim, I, 5; #armâtîs pâstôribus#, Albam properâvit,
  I, 25.

NOTE.--This is the original and most frequent use of the ablative
absolute.

4. CAUSE: compare Causal Clauses, _H_ 2 and 3.

  #ortâ# inter eôs #contentiône#, I, 40; dûrissimâ squâmârum #lôrîcâ#
  omnia têla facile #repellente#, XVII, 22; in cônfertâ multitûdine
  aegrê #prôcêdente carpentô#, XVIII, 17.

5. CONCESSION:

  agrum êius, #omnibus# circâ #vâstâtîs#, intâctum relîquit, XIX, 39.

6. Often time and cause together: compare note on Cum Clauses, _J_.
Examples are:

  #mîlitibus# sêgnius #dîmicantibus#, raptum sîgnum in hostem mîsit,
  VII, 9; #occîsô Tatiô#, ad Rômulum potentâtus omnis recidit, II, 40.

7. CONDITION:

  #rê# male #gestâ# (if he fails), XVI, 31; nê, #dêsertô# agrô, nôn
  esset (lest, if he neglected his farm, he might not have), XVII, 34.

8. MEANS:

  #advectîs ballistîs# et #catapultîs# (by bringing up, etc.) . .
  dêiciendus hostis fuit, XVII, 23.

9. ATTENDANT CIRCUMSTANCE:

  #crînibus passîs#, II, 36; #mâgnâ glôriâ# bellî rêgnâvit, IV, 75;
  scrîbâ cum rêge #parî ferê ôrnâtû# sedêbat, X, 6.

10. The ablative absolute is often best translated by the English
perfect active participle with an object: #armâtîs pâstôribus#, I, 25,
_having armed_ the shepherds. A combination of an abl. abs. and a finite
verb is often best rendered by two verbs in the same mood and tense:
#interêmptô Amûliô#, Numitôrem in rêgnum #restituit#, I, 37, _he killed_
Amulius _and restored_ Numitor to the throne.


_L._ PARTICIPLES

In Latin the participles, especially the perfect passive participle, are
used far more frequently than in English, and with a much larger variety
of meanings. The use of the participle tends to produce brevity of
expression. Thus the Latin participle may be equivalent to

1. A RELATIVE CLAUSE:

  #raptae# mulierês, II, 35; Rômânus . . male #sustinentem# (= quî
  male sustinêbat) arma Cûriâtium cônficit, IV, 29; ab laniô cultrô
  #adreptô# (with a knife _which he caught up_ from a butcher's
  stall), XII, 24; #volentibus# (= eîs quî volêbant) cônsulere sê dê
  iûre praebuit, XIII, 97.

2. A CAUSAL CLAUSE:

  necessitâte #compulsus# indicâvit, I, 24; nômina mûtâre nôn potuit
  #dêterritus# . . Nâviî auctôritâte, VI, 16; Hôc terrôre cêterî
  #adâctî# nômina prômptius dedêrunt, XV, 25.

3. A CONCESSIVE CLAUSE:

  #victus# (though beaten) crucis supplicium effûgit, XVI, 30.

4. Latin often uses a perfect passive participle in agreement with a
noun, where, judging from English usage, we should expect a noun with a
limiting genitive:

  ob #virginês# raptâs (on account of the _seizure of_ the maidens),
  II, 14; Annô trecentêsimô ab #urbe conditâ# (from the _founding of_
  the city), XII, 1.

5. English is fond of coördinated verbs, that is, verbs in exactly the
same mood, tense, and construction, _e.g._ 'They took the ass and
saddled him.' Latin, however, objects to such constructions, and prefers
to replace the former of the two verbs by some other form of expression,
_e.g._ a passive or deponent participle. We have to notice here two
classes of sentences:

(_a_) Such sentences as fulmine #îctum cônflagrâsse#, IV, 74, which =
fulmine #îctum esse et cônflagrâsse#, _i.e._ 'he _was struck_ by
lightning _and burned_,' etc.

(_b_) such sentences as the following: parvulôs alveô #impositôs
abiêcit#, I, 6 = parvulôs alveô #imposuit et abiêcit#; #êlatam# secûrim
in êius caput #dêiêcit#, VI, 37 = #extulit# secûrim #et# in êius caput
#dêiêcit#; côniugem ê Cûriâ #êvocâtum# . . rêgem #salûtâvit#, VII, 47 =
côniugem ê Cûriâ #êvocâvit et# eum rêgem #salûtâvit#.


_M._ INDIRECT DISCOURSE

1. INDIRECT DISCOURSE DEFINED.--The terms _Direct Discourse_ and
_Indirect Discourse_ denote the two distinct ways in which a writer may
quote the statement or represent the thought of another person. If the
writer gives the exact words in which the statement was made, or in
which the thought was formulated (if put into words at all), he is said
to use the _direct_ discourse. If, on the other hand, he gives merely
the substance or the gist of his own or another's statements or
thoughts, he is said to use the _indirect_ discourse. In Latin, as in
English, the indirect discourse is more common than the direct.

2. In passing from the direct discourse to the indirect, numerous
changes become necessary. These may, however, be readily grouped under
two heads: (_a_) those which occur in principal clauses, and (_b_) those
which occur in subordinate clauses.

3. CHANGES IN PRINCIPAL CLAUSES.--Principal clauses may be declarative,
interrogative, or imperative; that is, they may make a statement, ask a
question, or give expression to a command. We thus have to consider
three forms of principal clauses: (_a_) Statements, (_b_) Questions,
(_c_) Commands.

4. STATEMENTS IN INDIRECT DISCOURSE.

All Statements of the Direct Discourse, on passing into the Indirect,
fall into the infinitive mood, because they become objects of verbs of
saying:

  adfîrmâns #vîsum# (sc. #esse#) â sê Rômulum . . eundemque
  #praecipere#, II, 51 (direct form, #vîsus est# â mê Rômulus . .
  îdemque #praecipit#); prôclâmâbat fîliam suam iûre #caesam esse#,
  IV, 43 (direct form, fîlia mea iûre #caesa est#); minâtur sê vî
  #abstrâctûrum#, XII, 12 (direct form (ego) vî tê #abstraham#).

5. QUESTIONS IN INDIRECT DISCOURSE.

All Questions of the Direct Discourse, on passing into the Indirect,
fall into the subjunctive mood, because they are in reality dependent on
a verb of asking. No example of a question in formal indirect discourse
occurs in the selections contained in this book. Indirect questions
(cf. p. 3, n. 2), however, fall under this general head as giving some
one's thoughts without quoting his exact words.

6. COMMANDS IN INDIRECT DISCOURSE.

All Commands of the Direct Discourse, on passing into the Indirect, fall
into the subjunctive, because they are in reality dependent on some verb
like _imperâvit_, to be supplied in thought:

  proinde #nê gravârêtur# sê spectandum praebêre, XXI, 289 (direct
  form, #Nôlî gravârî# tê spectandum praebêre); satis cônstat Sullam
  . . prôclâmâsse, #vincerent#, dummodo scîrent, XXVII, 12-15 (direct
  form, #Vincite#, dummodo sciâtis).

7. SUBORDINATE CLAUSES IN INDIRECT DISCOURSE.

All Subordinate Clauses of the Indirect Discourse have their verbs in
the subjunctive mood:

  Tatius . . Tarpêiae optiônem mûneris dedit, #sî . . perdûxisset#,
  II, 19-21 (direct form, dô or dabô optiônem mûneris, #sî . .
  perdûxeris#: see note); Illa petiit quod #gererent#, II, 21 (direct
  form, Petô quod . . #geritis#).




The grammatical references in the footnotes are to the Latin Grammars in
most common use; H = Harkness' Complete Latin Grammar, references to
Harkness' Standard Grammar being inclosed in parentheses; M = Lane &
Morgan; A = Allen & Greenough; G = Gildersleeve; B = Bennett.




    [Illustration: THE HILLS OF ROME]

The original Latin city comprised only the Palatine and a small portion
of the surrounding territory. The Etruscans inhabited the Caelian Hill,
and extended toward the Esquiline. The Sabine town occupied the
Quirinal, which was originally connected with the Capitoline, on which
was the Sabine citadel, by a ridge sloping toward the Forum and the
Campus Martius. Ancus Marcius added to the city the Aventine, and built
a fortress on the Janiculum. Servius Tullius added the Viminal and
Esquiline, and inclosed the seven hills with a line of fortifications,
of which one portion is still traceable. The ridge connecting the
Capitoline and Quirinal was a barrier which cut the town in two. The
only means of communication between the two halves of the city, when its
population had reached nearly two million inhabitants, were the narrow
strip of land between the Capitoline and the river and a lane ten feet
wide crossing the ridge. To relieve the pressure, this ridge was cut
away by the Emperor Trajan, in whose Forum on the site of the
excavations stands the well-known 'Trajan's Column,' 140 feet high,
'erected to show to posterity how high was the mountain leveled by the
Emperor.' The business portion of the modern city occupies the Campus
Martius, its main artery, the famous 'Corso,' following the line of the
ancient street shown on the plan. See Lanciani, _Ancient Rome_, p. 86.




URBIS RÔMAE VIRÎ INLÛSTRÊS


#I. Romani imperii exordium# [[stripped text]]

Proca, rex Albanorum, Numitorem et Amulium filios habuit. Numitori, qui
natu maior erat, regnum reliquit; sed Amulius, pulso fratre, regnavit
et, ut eum subole privaret, Rheam Silviam, eius filiam, Vestae
sacerdotem fecit, quae tamen Romulum et Remum geminos edidit. Ea re
cognita Amulius ipsam in vincula coniecit, parvulos alveo impositos
abiecit in Tiberim, qui tunc forte super ripas erat effusus; sed,
relabente flumine, eos aqua in sicco reliquit. Vastae tum in iis locis
solitudines erant. Lupa, ut fama traditum est, ad vagitum accurrit,
infantes lingua lambit, ubera eorum ori matremque se gessit.

Cum lupa saepius ad parvulos veluti ad catulos reverteretur, Faustulus,
pastor regius, re animadversa eos tulit in casam et Accae Larentiae
coniugi dedit educandos. Adulti deinde hi inter pastores primo ludicris
certaminibus vires auxere, deinde venando saltus peragrare et latrones a
rapina pecorum arcere coeperunt. Quare cum iis insidiati essent
latrones, Remus captus est, Romulus vi se defendit. Tum Faustulus,
necessitate compulsus, indicavit Romulo quis esset eorum avus, quae
mater. Romulus statim armatis pastoribus Albam properavit.

Interea Remum latrones ad Amulium regem perduxerunt, eum accusantes,
quasi Numitoris agros infestare solitus esset; itaque Remus a rege
Numitori ad supplicium traditus est; at cum Numitor, adulescentis vultum
considerans, aetatem minimeque servilem indolem compararet, haud procul
erat quin nepotem agnosceret. Nam Remus oris lineamentis erat matri
simillimus aetasque expositionis temporibus congruebat. Ea res dum
Numitoris animum anxium tenet, repente Romulus supervenit, fratrem
liberat, interempto Amulio avum Numitorem in regnum restituit.

Deinde Romulus et Remus urbem in iisdem locis, ubi expositi ubique
educati erant, condiderunt; sed orta inter eos contentione, uter nomen
novae urbi daret eamque imperio regeret, auspicia decreverunt adhibere.
Remus prior sex vultures, Romulus postea duodecim vidit. Sic Romulus,
victor augurio, urbem Romam vocavit. Ad novae urbis tutelam sufficere
vallum videbatur. Cuius angustias inridens cum Remus saltu id
traiecisset, eum iratus Romulus interfecit, his increpans verbis: "Sic
deinde, quicumque alius transiliet moenia mea!" Ita solus potitus est
imperio Romulus.


    [[1]]

  #I. Rômânî imperiî exôrdium# [[as printed]]

  Proca,[1] rêx Albânôrum, Numitôrem et Amûlium fîliôs habuit.
  Numitôrî, quî nâtû[2] mâior erat, rêgnum relîquit;[3] sed Amûlius,
  pulsô[4] frâtre, rêgnâvit et, ut[5] eum subole[6] prîvâret,[5] Rhêam
    [[2]]
  Silviam, êius fîliam, Vestae[1] sacerdôtem fêcit, quae[2] tamen    {4}
  Rômulum et Remum geminôs êdidit.[3] Eâ[4] rê côgnitâ Amûlius ipsam[5]
  in vincula coniêcit,[6] parvulôs
  alveô[7] impositôs[8] abiêcit in
  Tiberim, quî tunc forte super
  rîpâs erat effûsus[9]; sed, relâbente
  flûmine, eôs aqua in siccô                                        {10}
  relîquit. Vâstae tum in iîs
  locîs sôlitûdinês erant. Lupa,
  ut fâmâ[10] trâditum est, ad vâgîtum[11] accurrit,
  înfantês linguâ[10] lambit, ûbera eôrum ôrî[7]
  mâtremque[12] sê gessit.                                          {15}

    [Illustration: TEMPLE OF VESTA / _From a coin_]

    [Illustration: A VESTAL]

  Cum[13] lupa saepius[14] ad parvulôs velutî ad
  catulôs reverterêtur,[13] Faustulus, pâstor
  rêgius,[15] rê[16] animadversâ eôs tulit in casam et              {18}
  Accae Lârentiae coniugî dedit[17] êducandôs.[18] Adultî[19] deinde
  hî inter pâstôrês prîmô lûdicrîs[20] certâminibus vîrês auxêre,[21]
  deinde vênandô[22] saltûs peragrâre et latrônês â rapînâ[23] pecorum
  arcêre coepêrunt. Quârê cum[13] iîs însidiâtî essent[13] latrônês,
  Remus captus est, Rômulus[24] vî sê dêfendit. Tum Faustulus,      {23}
    [[3]]
  necessitâte compulsus,[1] indicâvit Rômulô quis esset[2] eôrum
  avus, quae mâter. Rômulus statim armâtîs[3] pâstôribus Albam[4]   {25}
  properâvit.

  Intereâ Remum latrônês ad Amûlium rêgem perdûxêrunt,[5]
  eum accûsantês, quasi[6] Numitôris agrôs înfêstâre solitus[7] esset;
  itaque Remus â rêge Numitôrî ad[8] supplicium
  trâditus est; at cum Numitor,                                     {30}
  adulêscentis vultum cônsîderâns, aetâtem[9]
  minimêque servîlem indolem comparâret,
  haud[10] procul erat quîn nepôtem âgnôsceret.
  Nam Remus ôris lîneâmentîs[11] erat mâtrî[12]
  simillimus[13] aetâsque expositiônis temporibus                   {35}
  congruêbat. Ea rês dum Numitôris animum anxium tenet,[14]
  repente Rômulus supervenit,[15] frâtrem lîberat,[15] interêmptô Amûliô
  avum Numitôrem in rêgnum restituit.[15]

    [Illustration: CASA]

    [Illustration: TIBER STATUE / _Paris_]

  [Sidenote: B.C. 754.]

  Deinde Rômulus et Remus urbem in iîsdem locîs, ubi expositî[16]
  ubique êducâtî erant, condidêrunt[17]; sed ortâ[18] inter eôs     {40}
  contentiône, uter nômen novae urbî daret[19] eamque imperiô
  regeret, auspicia[20] dêcrêvêrunt[21] adhibêre. Remus prior[22] sex
    [[4]]
  vulturês, Rômulus posteâ duodecim vîdit. Sîc Rômulus, victor
  auguriô,[1] urbem Rômam vocâvit. Ad[2] novae urbis tûtêlam sufficere
  vâllum vidêbâtur. Cûius[3] angustiâs inrîdêns cum Remus           {45}
  saltû id trâiêcisset, eum îrâtus[4] Rômulus interfêcit, hîs increpâns
  verbîs: "Sîc[5] deinde, quîcumque alius trânsiliet moenia mea!"
  Ita sôlus potîtus est imperiô[6] Rômulus.

    Among the few Trojans who escaped after the fall of Troy was
    Aeneas, the son of Venus and the hero Anchises. After many
    wanderings Aeneas reached Italy, married there Lavinia, the
    daughter of Latinus, king of the Latins, and founded a town called
    Lavinium, from the name of his wife. He was succeeded by his son
    Ascanius, who founded a second city, called Alba Longa, and
    transferred thither the seat of government. The date traditionally
    assigned to the capture of Troy was 1184 B.C. Hence it is clear
    that Alba Longa was settled more than 400 years before the
    foundation of Rome in 754 B.C. To fill this gap a list of fourteen
    Alban kings, all descendants of Aeneas, was given by the Roman
    writers. How Rome itself was founded from Alba Longa is described
    in the text. It should be kept constantly in mind that little
    faith is to be put in these traditional accounts of Rome's early
    history, at least as far as details are concerned. Latin writers
    tell us that the oldest records of the city perished in the sack
    of Rome by the Gauls in 388 B.C. The first historical work written
    by a Roman was published about 215 B.C., more than 500 years after
    the foundation of the city. Many of the stories were obviously
    invented to account for institutions which existed in the later
    times, and the traditional narrative is full of inconsistencies
    and contradictions.

    [Footnotes: I (pages 1-4)

    1.1: #Proca# was the twelfth king of Alba Longa.
    1.2: #nâtû mâior#: 'greater by birth' = 'elder.'
    1.3: from _relinquô_.
    1.4: #pulsô# (_pellô_) #frâtre#: abl. abs.; 'his brother having
    been driven out' (pass.) = 'having driven out,' _or_ 'when he had
    driven out his brother' (act.): H 489 (431): M 638: A 255: G 409:
    B 227.
    1.5: #ut prîvâret#: purpose: H 568 (497, II): M 893: A 317, 1:
    G 545: B 282.
    1.6: abl. of separation: H 462 (414, I): M 601: A 243, _a_: G 405:
    B 214, 1, c.
    2.1: See Voc., _Vesta_.
    2.2: #quae# = _sed ea_.
    2.3: _êdô_.
    2.4: #eâ rê côgnitâ# (_côgnôscô_): cf. p. 1, n. 4.
    2.5: i.e. Rhea Silvia.
    2.6: _coniciô_.
    2.7: dat. with compound verb: H 429 (386): M 534: A 228: G 347:
    B 187, III.
    2.8: #impositôs# (_impônô_) #abiêcit# (_abiciô_) = _imposuit et
    abiêcit_. English is fond of coördination of clauses; Latin
    prefers to subordinate clause to clause. Hence, in general, Latin
    avoids two coördinated verbs. See p. xxiv, L 5, and H 639
    (549, 5): A 292, R.: G 664, R. 1, 2: B 337, 2.
    2.9: _effundô_.
    2.10: abl. of means: H 476 (420): M 645: A 248, c, 1: G 401:
    B 218.
    2.11: #ad vâgîtum#: 'to (their) squalling,' i.e. to them as they
    were crying.
    2.12: #mâtrem sê gessit# (_gerô_): 'conducted herself, acted like
    a mother.'
    2.13: not only '_when_,' but also '_because_ the wolf kept coming
    back.' See p. xxii, J.
    2.14: 'very often.' The comparative often has this intensive
    force.
    2.15: adj. = the genitive of _rêx_.
    2.16: #rê . . . tulit# (_ferô_) = _rem animadvertit et eôs tulit_;
    cf. p. xxiii, K 10.
    2.17: _dô_.
    2.18: = _ut êducârentur_. The gerundive expresses purpose here, as
    often. See p. xviii, E 4, H 622 (544, N. 2): M 994: A 294, _d_:
    G 430: B 337, 7, 2.
    2.19: #adultî# (_adolêscô_): 'having grown' = 'when grown.'
    2.20: #lûdicrîs certâminibus#: 'with playful contests,'--such as
    running, wrestling, and boxing. For the case, cf. n. 10.
    2.21: = _auxêrunt_ (_augeô_).
    2.22: The abl. of the gerund here denotes manner.
    2.23: 'from the seizure of' = 'from stealing.'
    2.24: = '_but_ Romulus.'
    3.1: _compellô_.
    3.2: indir. quest.: H 649, II (529, I): M 810: A 334: G 467:
    B 300.
    3.3: See p. 1, n. 4.
    3.4: acc. of limit without preposition: H 418 (380, II): M 515:
    A 258, _b_: G 337: B 182, 1, _a_; cf. English 'to go _home_.'
    3.5: _perdûcô_.
    3.6: 'because, as they said'; _quasi_ often denotes a statement or
    thought of some person other than the writer himself. See p. xxi,
    H 5.
    3.7: _soleô_.
    3.8: #ad supplicium#: 'to be punished'; _ad_ with its noun often
    denotes purpose.
    3.9: #aetâtem . . . comparâret#: 'compared his age with his
    nature, (which was) by no means that of a slave'; i.e. his
    appearance and demeanor indicated that he belonged to a higher
    station than the shepherds.
    3.10: #haud . . . âgnôsceret#: 'he came very near to recognizing
    him'; how literally? In this construction _quîn_ = _ut nôn_, and
    the subjunctive is one of result: H 595 (504): M 913: A 319, _d_:
    G 555: B 284, 3.
    3.11: abl. of specification: H 480 (424): M 650: A 253: G 397:
    B 226, 1.
    3.12: _similis_ is construed with both gen. and dat.
    3.13: 'very like'; cf. a similar use of the comparative in l. 16.
    3.14: _dum_, 'while,' regularly takes the pres. indic. where
    English uses the imperfect: H 533, 4 (467, 4): M 917: A 276, _e_:
    G 570, R.: B 293.
    3.15: historical presents: H 532, 3 (467, III): M 734: A 276, _d_:
    G 229: B 259, 3.
    3.16: _expônô_.
    3.17: _condô_.
    3.18: #ortâ# (_orior_) . . . #contentiône# = '_because_ a strife
    arose'; see p. xxiii, K 4.
    3.19: indir. quest. depending on _contentiône_; cf. n. 2. The
    strife centered in the question, "Which of us shall rule?"
    3.20: Romulus stood on the Palatine Hill, and Remus on the
    Aventine.
    3.21: _dêcernô_.
    3.22: 'first.'
    4.1: 'by virtue of the augury'; abl. of cause: H 475 (416): M 612:
    A 245: G 408: B 219.
    4.2: #Ad . . . tûtêlam#: 'to guard the new city.' Cf. p. 3, n. 8.
    4.3: Render 'its.' Latin is fond of closely connecting successive
    clauses, and for this purpose often employs a relative pronoun,
    where English uses a simple demonstrative, or a demonstrative or
    personal pronoun with a conjunction,--generally _and_, often _but_
    or _for_: cf. p. 2, n. 2.
    4.4: 'in anger.' An adjective may often be best rendered by an
    adverb or adverbial phrase.
    4.5: Sc. _pereat_ (subjunctive of wish).
    4.6: H 477, I (421, I): M 646: A 249: G 407: B 218, 1.]


#II. Romulus, Romanorum rex primus# [[stripped text]]

753-715 B.C.

Romulus imaginem urbis magis quam urbem fecerat; incolae deerant. Erat
in proximo lucus; hunc asylum fecit. Et statim eo mira vis latronum
pastorumque confugit. Cum vero uxores ipse populusque non haberent,
legatos circa vicinas gentes misit, qui societatem conubiumque novo
populo peterent. Nusquam benigne audita legatio est; ludibrium etiam
additum: "Cur non feminis quoque asylum aperuistis? Id enim compar foret
conubium." Romulus, aegritudinem animi dissimulans, ludos parat; indici
deinde finitimis spectaculum iubet. Multi convenere studio etiam
videndae novae urbis, maxime Sabini cum liberis et coniugibus. Ubi
spectaculi tempus venit eoque conversae mentes cum oculis erant, tum
signo dato iuvenes Romani discurrunt, virgines rapiunt.

Haec fuit statim causa belli. Sabini enim ob virgines raptas bellum
adversus Romanos sumpserunt, et cum Romae appropinquarent, Tarpeiam
virginem nacti sunt, quae aquam forte extra moenia petitum ierat. Huius
pater Romanae praeerat arci. Titus Tatius, Sabinorum dux, Tarpeiae
optionem muneris dedit, si exercitum suum in Capitolium perduxisset.
Illa petiit quod Sabini in sinistris manibus gererent, videlicet aureos
anulos et armillas. Quibus dolose promissis, Tarpeia Sabinos in arcem
perduxit, ubi Tatius scutis eam obrui iussit; nam et ea in laevis
habuerant. Sic impia proditio celeri poena vindicata est.

Deinde Romulus ad certamen processit, et in eo loco, ubi nunc Romanum
Forum est, pugnam conseruit. Primo impetu vir inter Romanos insignis,
nomine Hostilius, fortissime dimicans cecidit; cuius interitu
consternati Romani fugere coeperunt. Iam Sabini clamitabant: "Vicimus
perfidos hospites, imbelles hostes. Nunc sciunt longe aliud esse
virgines rapere, aliud pugnare cum viris." Tunc Romulus, arma ad caelum
tollens, Iovi aedem vovit, et exercitus seu forte seu divinitus
restitit. Itaque proelium redintegratur; sed raptae mulieres crinibus
passis ausae sunt se inter tela volantia inferre et hinc patres, hinc
viros orantes, pacem conciliarunt.

Romulus, foedere cum Tatio icto, et Sabinos in urbem recepit et regnum
cum Tatio sociavit. Verum haud ita multo post, occiso Tatio, ad Romulum
potentatus omnis recidit. Centum deinde ex senioribus elegit, quorum
consilio omnia ageret, quos senatores nominavit propter senectutem. Tres
equitum centurias constituit, populum in triginta curias distribuit. His
ita ordinatis, cum ad exercitum lustrandum contionem in campo ad Caprae
paludem haberet, subito coorta est tempestas cum magno fragore
tonitribusque et Romulus e conspectu ablatus est. Ad deos transisse
vulgo creditus est; cui rei fidem fecit Iulius Proculus, vir nobilis.
Orta enim inter patres et plebem seditione, in contionem processit,
iureiurando adfirmans visum a se Romulum augustiore forma, eundemque
praecipere ut seditionibus abstinerent et rem militarem colerent;
futurum ut omnium gentium domini exsisterent. Aedes in colle Quirinali
Romulo constituta, ipse pro deo cultus et Quirinus est appellatus.


  #II. Rômulus, Rômânôrum rêx prîmus# [[as printed]]

  753-715 B.C.

  Rômulus[7] imâginem urbis magis quam urbem fêcerat; incolae
  deerant.[8] Erat in[9] proximô lûcus[10]; hunc asylum fêcit. Et
  statim eô mîra vîs[11] latrônum pâstôrumque cônfûgit. Cum[12] vêrô
    [[5]]
  uxôrês ipse[1] populusque nôn habêrent, lêgâtôs circâ vîcînâs
  gentês mîsit,[2] quî[3] societâtem cônûbiumque[4] novô populô      {5}
  peterent.[3] Nûsquam benîgnê audîta lêgâtiô est; lûdibrium etiam
  additum[5]: "Cûr nôn fêminîs quoque asylum aperuistis? Id
  enim compâr foret[6] cônûbium." Rômulus, aegritûdinem animî
  dissimulâns, lûdôs parat; indîcî[7] deinde fînitimîs spectâculum
  iubet. Multî convênêre[8] studiô etiam[9] videndae novae urbis,   {10}
  mâximê Sabînî cum lîberîs et coniugibus. Ubi spectâculî tempus
  vênit eôque[10] conversae[11] mentês[12] cum oculîs erant, tum sîgnô
  datô iuvenês Rômânî discurrunt, virginês rapiunt.[13]

    [Illustration: ARMILLA]

  Haec[14] fuit statim causa bellî. Sabînî enim ob[15] virginês raptâs
  bellum adversus Rômânôs sûmpsêrunt,[16] et cum                    {15}
  Rômae[17] appropinquârent, Tarpêiam virginem nactî
  sunt,[18] quae aquam forte[19] extrâ moenia petîtum[20]
  ierat. Hûius pater Rômânae praeerat arcî. Titus
  Tatius, Sabînôrum dux, Tarpêiae optiônem mûneris
  dedit, sî exercitum suum in Capitôlium                            {20}
    [[6]]
  perdûxisset.[1] Illa petiit quod[2] Sabînî in sinistrîs manibus[3]
      gererent,[4]                                                  {21}
  vidêlicet aureôs ânulôs et armillâs. Quibus dolôsê prômissîs,
  Tarpêia Sabînôs in arcem perdûxit, ubi Tatius
  scûtîs[5] eam obruî iussit; nam et[6] ea in laevîs[7]
  habuerant.[8] Sîc impia prôditiô celerî poenâ[5] vindicâta        {25}
  est.

    [Illustration: DEATH OF TARPÊIA]

  Deinde Rômulus ad certâmen prôcessit, et in
  eô locô, ubi nunc Rômânum Forum[9] est, pûgnam
  cônseruit. Prîmô[10] impetû vir inter[11] Rômânôs însîgnis, nômine[12]
  Hostîlius, fortissimê dîmicâns cecidit; cûius interitû[13] cônsternâtî
  Rômânî fugere coepêrunt. Iam Sabînî clâmitâbant: "Vîcimus         {31}
  perfidôs hospites,[14] imbellês hostês. Nunc sciunt longê[15] aliud
  esse virginês rapere,[16] aliud pûgnâre[16] cum virîs." Tunc Rômulus,
  arma ad caelum tollêns, Iovî aedem[17] vôvit, et exercitus seu forte
  seu dîvînitus restitit.[18] Itaque proelium redintegrâtur; sed raptae
  mulierês crînibus[19] passîs ausae sunt sê inter têla volantia înferre
  et hinc patrês, hinc virôs ôrantês,[20] pâcem conciliârunt.       {37}

    [Illustration: RÔMULUS AS QUIRÎNUS / _From a coin_]

  Rômulus, foedere[21] cum Tatiô îctô, et Sabînôs in urbem recêpit
    [[7]]
  et rêgnum[1] cum Tatiô sociâvit. Vêrum haud ita multô post,
  occîsô[2] Tatiô, ad Rômulum potentâtus omnis recidit.[3] Centum   {40}
  deinde ex seniôribus êlêgit, quôrum cônsiliô[4] omnia ageret,[5] quôs
  senâtôrês nôminâvit propter senectûtem. Três equitum[6] centuriâs
  cônstituit, populum in trîgintâ cûriâs distribuit. Hîs ita
  ôrdinâtîs, cum[7] ad[8] exercitum lûstrandum côntiônem in campô[9] ad
  Caprae[10] palûdem habêret, subitô coorta est                     {45}
  tempestâs cum mâgnô fragôre tonitribusque et
  Rômulus ê cônspectû ablâtus[11] est. Ad deôs
  trânsîsse vulgô crêditus[12] est; cuî[13] reî fidem
  fêcit Iûlius Proculus, vir nôbilis. Ortâ[14] enim
  inter patrês et plêbem sêditiône, in côntiônem                    {50}
  prôcessit,[15] iûreiûrandô adfîrmâns vîsum[16] â sê
  Rômulum augustiôre[17] fôrmâ, eundemque[18] praecipere[19] ut
      sêditiônibus
  abstinêrent[20] et rem mîlitârem colerent[20]; futûrum[21] ut
    [[8]]
  omnium gentium dominî exsisterent. Aedês in colle Quirînâlî
  Rômulô[1] cônstitûta,[2] ipse[3] prô deô cultus[2] et Quirînus est
  appellâtus.                                                       {56}

    [Footnotes: II (pages 4-8)

    4.7: It has been suggested that the name _Rômulus_ is derived from
    _Rôma_, and that this in turn was made from an ancient word
    _Rumon_, 'river.' _Rôma_ would then be 'the town by the river,'
    'Rivertown' (cf. English 'Watertown,' etc.), and _Rômulus_ would
    be 'the man from Rivertown.'
    4.8: _dêsum_.
    4.9: #in proximô#: 'near by.' Phrases consisting of a preposition
    and a neuter adjective are common, and have the force of
    adjectives or adverbs.
    4.10: This grove lay between the two summits of the Capitoline
    Hill.
    4.11: #vîs# often means 'number,' as here, or 'quantity'; 'power'
    is used in the same sense in some parts of Great Britain.
    4.12: #cum#: 'since': H 598 (517): M 863: A 326: G 586: B 286, 2.
    5.1: = _Rômulus_. Cf. _ipsam_, I, 5.
    5.2: _mittô_.
    5.3: #quî . . . peterent#: rel. clause of purpose; see p. xviii,
    E 2, and H 590 (497, I): M 835: A 317, 2: G 630: B 282, 2.
    5.4: In early times the right of intermarriage did not exist
    between neighboring tribes, except by special treaty.
    5.5: Sc. _est_, which, like _esse_, is often omitted with the
    passive, especially in rapid narrative.
    5.6: = _esset_: H 205, 2 (204, 2): M 327: A 119, N.: G 116, N. 1,
    _c_: B 100, N. 2.
    5.7: #indîcî . . . iubet#: 'he bids a show to be announced.' Such
    an announcement would carry with it an invitation to be present.
    5.8: Cf. p. 2, n. 21.
    5.9: i.e. they were not only interested in the games, but they
    were also curious to see the new city.
    5.10: = _in spectâculum_.
    5.11: _convertô_.
    5.12: #mentês cum oculîs#: 'minds and eyes alike.' The emphasis is
    on _mentês_; they were thinking only of the show.
    5.13: In rapid historical narrative, clauses are often set side by
    side without a connective. See also n. 5 above.
    5.14: #Haec#, referring to the matters related in the preceding
    paragraph, should theoretically be neuter, but is feminine because
    the predicate noun #causa# is feminine. Such attraction is the
    rule in Latin. H 396, 2 (445, 4): A 195, _d_: G 211, 5: B 246, 5.
    5.15: #ob virginês raptâs#: 'on account of the stolen maidens' =
    'on account of the seizure of the maidens.' A participle agreeing
    with a noun is preferred in Latin to an abstract noun with a
    dependent genitive.
    5.16: _sûmô_.
    5.17: dat.; why?
    5.18: 'they happened upon' (_nancîscor_).
    5.19: #forte . . . ierat#: 'had gone by chance' = 'happened to
    have gone.' _Forte_ is often best rendered by a clause: 'as it
    happened,' or 'it so happened.'
    5.20: supine denoting purpose; see p. xviii, E 6, and H 633 (546):
    M 1005: A 302: G 435: B 340, 1.
    6.1: The subjunctive here, as in #gererent#, is due to implied
    indirect discourse; #sî perdûxisset# represents the fut. perf.
    indic. of direct discourse _sî perdûxeris_, 'if you shall have
    led' = 'if you (shall) lead'; H 646 (527, I): M 1034, 1038: A 337:
    G 656-7: B 319, B.
    6.2: 'that which.'
    6.3: _manus_ often = 'arm,' just as _pês_ = 'leg.'
    6.4: #gererent#: either 'wore' or 'bore.' Tarpeia meant it in the
    former sense; Tatius chose to understand it in the latter.
    6.5: Why abl.?
    6.6: #et ea# = _ea quoque_: 'these too,' as well as the _armillae_
    and _ânulî_.
    6.7: Sc. _manibus_.
    6.8: Note the tense; they _had had_ these, too, on their arms when
    the bargain was struck.
    6.9: See Vocab., _Forum_.
    6.10: #Prîmô impetû#: 'in the very first charge.' The ablative
    fixes the time of #cecidit#.
    6.11: #inter . . . însîgnis#: 'the most conspicuous of the
    Romans.' How literally?
    6.12: abl. of specification.
    6.13: = _morte_. The abl. includes the ideas of means and cause.
    6.14: 'hosts.' The relation of host and guest was regarded by the
    Romans, as by other ancient peoples, as peculiarly sacred.
    6.15: #longê aliud . . . aliud#: 'one thing . . . quite another.'
    Note here the difference between the English and the Latin idiom.
    6.16: Infinitives, because the clauses in which they stand are
    subjects of #esse#; H 615 (538): M 972: A 270: G 422: B 377.
    6.17: This temple was called the Temple of _Iuppiter Stator_, i.e.
    the 'Stayer,' the god who had _stayed_ the army's flight.
    6.18: _resistô_: 'maintained its ground,' 'held its own,' as
    contrasted with its previous flight (_fugere coepêrunt_).
    6.19: #crînibus passîs# (_pandô_): 'with streaming hair.'
    6.20: '_by_ beseeching'; the abl. of the gerund (_ôrandô_) might
    have been used.
    6.21: #foedere . . . îctô# (_îcô_): 'having struck a treaty.' How
    literally? The abl. abs. is one of the regular substitutes in
    Latin for the missing perfect active participle. In the phrase
    _foedus îcere_, the verb suggests the striking of the victims in
    the sacrifice which accompanied the making of the treaty.
    7.1: #rêgnum . . . sociâvit#: i.e. henceforth there were two
    kings.
    7.2: By the inhabitants of Laurentum, whose ambassadors he had
    insulted.
    7.3: Note the force of the prefix: the sovereignty 'came _back_,'
    or 'devolved _again_' upon Romulus, precisely as before he shared
    it with Tatius.
    7.4: abl. of means.
    7.5: Cf. p. 5, n. 3.
    7.6: See Vocab., _eques_.
    7.7: 'When': H 600, II (521, II): M 858: A 325: G 585: B 288.
    7.8: #ad . . . lûstrandum# = _ut . . . lûstrâret_. What does the
    gerundive construction express?
    7.9: Sc. _Mârtiô_. See Vocab., _campus_, and map, p. xxviii.
    7.10: #Caprae palûdem#: 'Goat Swamp.'
    7.11: _auferô_.
    7.12: #crêditus est#: we would say: 'it was believed that he,'
    etc.; Latin prefers the personal construction, and says: 'he was
    believed to have,' etc.
    7.13: #cuî . . . fêcit#: literally 'for which thing he made (i.e.
    secured) belief (i.e. general acceptance).'
    7.14: What does the abl. abs. here express? See p. xxiii, K 6.
    7.15: _prôcêdô_.
    7.16: Sc. _esse_. #vîsum esse# and #praecipere# depend on
    #adfîrmâns#: see H 642 (523, I): M 1023: A 336, 2: G 650: B 314:
    and p. xxv, M 4.
    7.17: #augustiôre fôrmâ#: 'of more imposing presence' (than he was
    while on earth); abl. of characteristic, H 473, 2 (419, II):
    M 643: A 251: G 400: B 224.
    7.18: i.e. _Rômulum_.
    7.19: Note the change of tense from that in _vîsum_ (_esse_)
    above. Proculus actually said: (_Rômulus_) _praecipit_, i.e. he
    used the historical present. Above _vîsum_ (_esse_) represents
    _vîsus est_ of the direct discourse.
    7.20: substantive clause of purpose; H 565 (498, I): M 892: A 331:
    G 546: B 295, 4.
    7.21: #futûrum ut . . . exsisterent# gives the statement, not of
    Proculus, but of Romulus himself. The inf. #futûrum# (_esse_)
    depends on a verb of saying implied in #praecipere#. Romulus said
    _exsistêtis_. Since, however, _exsistô_ has no supine and so no
    future participle, no direct future infinitive can be formed from
    it. Hence the phrase _futûrum ut_ with subjunctive becomes
    necessary: 'it would happen that they would become,' etc.
    8.1: 'in honor of Romulus'; dat. of advantage.
    8.2: With #cônstitûta# and #cultus# (_colô_) sc. _est_.
    8.3: For the omission of the conjunction before #ipse#, cf. p. 5,
    n. 13.]


#III. Numa Pompilius, Romanorum rex secundus# [[stripped text]]

716-673 B.C.

Successit Romulo Numa Pompilius, vir inclita iustitia et religione. Is
Curibus, ex oppido Sabinorum, accitus est. Qui cum Romam venisset, ut
populum ferum religione mitigaret, sacra plurima instituit. Aram Vestae
consecravit, et ignem in ara perpetuo alendum virginibus dedit. Flaminem
Iovis sacerdotem creavit eumque insigni veste et curuli sella adornavit.
Dicitur quondam ipsum Iovem e caelo elicuisse. Hic, ingentibus
fulminibus in urbem demissis, descendit in nemus Aventinum, ubi Numam
docuit quibus sacris fulmina essent procuranda, et praeterea imperii
certa pignora populo Romano daturum se esse promisit. Numa laetus rem
populo nuntiavit. Postridie omnes ad aedes regias convenerunt
silentesque exspectabant quid futurum esset. Atque sole orto delabitur e
caelo scisso scutum, quod ancile appellavit Numa. Id ne furto auferri
posset, Mamurium fabrum undecim scuta eadem forma fabricare iussit.
Duodecim autem Salios Martis sacerdotes legit, qui ancilia, secreta illa
imperii pignora, custodirent et Kalendis Martiis per urbem canentes et
rite saltantes ferrent. Annum in duodecim menses ad cursum lunae
descripsit; nefastos fastosque dies fecit; portas Iano gemino
aedificavit ut esset index pacis et belli; nam apertus, in armis esse
civitatem, clausus, pacatos circa omnes populos, significabat.

Leges quoque plurimas et utiles tulit Numa. Ut vero maiorem institutis
suis auctoritatem conciliaret, simulavit sibi cum dea Egeria esse
conloquia nocturna eiusque monitu se omnia, quae ageret, facere. Lucus
erat, quem medium fons perenni rigabat aqua; eo saepe Numa sine arbitris
se inferebat, velut ad congressum deae; ita omnium animos ea pietate
imbuit, ut fides ac iusiurandum non minus quam legum et poenarum metus
cives contineret. Bellum quidem nullum gessit, sed non minus civitati
profuit quam Romulus. Morbo exstinctus in Ianiculo monte sepultus est.
Ita duo deinceps reges, ille bello, hic pace, civitatem auxerunt.
Romulus septem et triginta regnavit annos, Numa tres et quadraginta.


  #III. Numa Pompilius, Rômânôrum rêx secundus# [[as printed]]

  716-673 B.C.

    [Illustration: SELLA CURÛLIS / _From a coin_]

  Successit Rômulô Numa Pompilius, vir inclitâ iûstitiâ[4] et
  religiône.[4] Is Curibus,[5] ex oppidô Sabînôrum, accîtus est. Quî
  cum Rômam vênisset, ut[6] populum ferum religiône mîtigâret, sacra
  plûrima înstituit. Âram Vestae cônsecrâvit, et îgnem[7] in ârâ
  perpetuô alendum virginibus dedit. Flâminem[8]                     {5}
  Iovis sacerdôtem creâvit eumque însîgnî veste[9]
  et curûlî[10] sellâ adôrnâvit. Dîcitur[11] quondam
  ipsum Iovem ê caelô êlicuisse.[12] Hîc, ingentibus
  fulminibus in urbem dêmissîs, dêscendit in nemus
  Aventînum, ubi Numam docuit quibus sacrîs                         {10}
  fulmina[13] essent prôcûranda,[13] et praetereâ imperiî
    [[9]]
  certa[1] pîgnora populô Rômânô datûrum sê esse prômîsit. Numa
  laetus rem populô nûntiâvit. Postrîdiê omnês ad aedês[2] rêgiâs
  convênêrunt silentêsque exspectâbant[3] quid futûrum esset.[4] Atque
  sôle ortô dêlâbitur ê caelô scissô[5] scûtum, quod                {15}
  ancîle appellâvit Numa. Id nê[6] fûrtô auferrî
  posset,[6] Mâmurium fabrum ûndecim scûta eâdem
  fôrmâ fabricâre iussit. Duodecim autem Saliôs[7]
  Mârtis sacerdôtês lêgit, quî ancîlia, sêcrêta
  illa imperiî pîgnora, cûstôdîrent[8] et Kalendîs                  {20}
  Mârtiîs per urbem canentês et rîte saltantês
  ferrent.[8] Annum in duodecim[9] mênsês ad
  cursum lûnae dêscrîpsit; nefâstôs[10] fâstôsque
  diês fêcit; portâs Iânô[11] geminô[12] aedificâvit
  ut esset index pâcis et bellî; nam apertus,[13] in                {25}
  armîs esse cîvitâtem, clausus,[13] pâcâtôs circâ
  omnês populôs, sîgnificâbat.

    [Illustration: ANCÎLIA / _From a coin_]

    [Illustration: IÂNUS]

  Lêgês[14] quoque plûrimâs et ûtilês tulit                         {28}
  Numa. Ut vêrô mâiôrem înstitûtîs[15] suîs auctôritâtem conciliâret,
    [[10]]
  simulâvit[1] sibi[2] cum deâ Êgeriâ esse conloquia nocturna êiusque[3]
  monitû sê omnia, quae ageret, facere. Lûcus erat, quem[4] medium
  fôns perennî rigâbat aquâ; eô saepe Numa sine arbitrîs[5] sê      {32}
  înferêbat, velut[6] ad congressum deae; ita[7] omnium animôs eâ[7]
  pietâte imbuit, ut fidês[8] ac iûsiûrandum nôn minus quam lêgum
  et poenârum metus cîvês continêret.[9] Bellum quidem[10] nûllum   {35}
  gessit, sed[10] nôn minus cîvitâtî prôfuit quam Rômulus.[11] Morbô[12]
  exstînctus in Iâniculô monte sepultus[13] est. Ita duo[14] deinceps
  rêgês, ille bellô, hîc pâce, cîvitâtem auxêrunt. Rômulus septem
  et trîgintâ rêgnâvit annôs,[15] Numa três et quadrâgintâ.         {39}

    [Footnotes: III (pages 8-10)

    8.4: See p. 7, n. 17.
    8.5: #Curibus . . . Sabînôrum#: 'from Cures, a town of the
    Sabines.' H 462 (412, II): M 605: A 258, _a_: G 391: B 229, 1.
    '_At_ Cures, a town of the Sabines,' would be _Curibus, in oppidô
    Sabînôrum_. The two phrases well illustrate the difference between
    the treatment of names of towns, and that of common nouns, in
    expressions intended to denote rest in a place, or motion from a
    given point.
    8.6: #ut . . . mîtigâret#: purpose clause, to be joined with what
    follows. Phrases and clauses often thus precede the words which
    they modify.
    8.7: #îgnem . . . alendum#: for the form of expression, see p. 2,
    n. 18.
    8.8: #Flâminem . . . creâvit#: 'he appointed a priest to be
    Jupiter's Flamen.' See Vocab., _flâmen_.
    8.9: The distinctive parts of the dress worn by the _Flâminês_
    were (1) a close-fitting woolen cap, from which projected a stick
    of olive wood, called _apex_; (2) the _toga praetexta_ (see
    Vocab., _toga_); and (3) a laurel crown.
    8.10: See Vocab., _sella_.
    8.11: Cf. p. 7, n. 12.
    8.12: _êliciô_.
    8.13: The Romans derived many omens from thunder. _Prôcûrâre_ is
    the technical word for 'caring for' an omen, i.e. warding off all
    harmful effects by sacrifices.
    9.1: 'trustworthy.' This word never = 'certain,' as in the phrase
    'a certain man.' In that sense _quîdam_ is used.
    9.2: #aedês rêgiâs#: 'the palace.' What two meanings does _aedês_
    bear?
    9.3: 'waited (to see) what,' etc.
    9.4: Why subjunctive? See p. 3, n. 2.
    9.5: _scindô_. #dêlâbitur . . . scûtum#: 'the heavens were opened
    and a shield descended.'
    9.6: Negative clause of purpose: H 568 (497, II): M 893: A 317, 1:
    G 545, 3: B 282. On the possession of this _ancîle_ Rome's power
    was believed to depend; hence Numa's care in guarding it.
    9.7: #Saliôs . . . fêcit#: 'he chose twelve Salii as priests of
    Mars.'
    9.8: Why subjunctive? Cf. p. 5, n. 3.
    9.9: Roman writers say that before Numa's time the year contained
    only ten months, a statement hardly credible.
    9.10: #nefâstôs . . . fêcit#: 'he made a distinction between _diês
    nefâstî_ and _diês fâstî_.' See Vocab., _fâstus_ and _nefâstus_.
    9.11: Cf. p. 8, n. 1.
    9.12: 'two-headed.' The reference is to a temple of Janus in the
    Forum, with two doors opposite each other, so that the whole
    structure resembled an arch.
    9.13: Both adjectives = temporal clauses, signifying respectively
    'when open,' 'when shut.' They agree with _Iânus_ understood,
    which means the temple, not the god. After Numa's time the temple
    remained open till 235 B.C. It was opened again in the same year,
    and not closed till 29 B.C.
    9.14: #Lêgês quoque#: '_Laws_ too,' i.e. laws as well as religious
    ceremonies and priestly orders.
    9.15: #înstitûtîs#: dative with #conciliâret#.
    10.1: How different in meaning from _dissimulâns_, II, 9?
    10.2: #sibi . . . esse conloquia#: 'that he had conversations.'
    #sibi# is dat. of the possessor; H 430 (387): M 542: A 231: G 349:
    B 190.
    10.3: #êius monitû#: 'at her suggestion.' Cf. _quôrum cônsiliô_,
    II, 41.
    10.4: #quem medium#: 'the middle of which.'
    10.5: Here in its original sense of 'witness.'
    10.6: #velut . . . deae#: 'giving it out that he was going to meet
    the goddess'; #velut# is used here as _quasi_ is in I, 28. See
    note there [[note 3.6]]. For #ad congressum# see p. 3, n. 8.
    #deae# is dat. after the prefix in #congressum#; cf. H 429 (386):
    M 532: A 228: G 347: B 187, III.
    10.7: #ita# and #eâ# reinforce each other. 'To such a degree
    (#ita#), and with such (#eâ#) piety,' etc.
    10.8: Here = 'respect for their oaths (and obligations).' #fidês
    ac iûsiûrandum# together = 'their own moral sense,' as opposed to
    the restraints of the law.
    10.9: subjunctive of result: H 570 (500, II): M 905: A 319, 1:
    G 552, 2: B 284.
    10.10: #quidem# is concessive, and so = 'to be sure, it is true.'
    Hence #quidem . . . sed# = _quamquam . . . sed tamen_.
    10.11: Sc. _prôfuerat_.
    10.12: #Morbô exstînctus# (_exstinguô_) means that he died a
    natural death. We are to feel a contrast here to the miraculous
    disappearance of Romulus, as described on page 7.
    10.13: _sepeliô_.
    10.14: #duo deinceps rêgês#: 'two _successive_ kings.' When an
    adverb like _deinceps_ stands between an adjective and a noun, it
    has the value of an adjective.
    10.15: acc. of extent of time: H 417 (379): M 513: A 256, 2:
    G 336: B 181. See also p. xvii, D 1.]


#IV. Tullus Hostîlius, Romanorum rex tertius# [[stripped text]]

673-641 B.C.

Mortuo Numa Tullus Hostilius rex creatus est. Hic non solum proximo regi
dissimilis, sed ferocior etiam Romulo fuit. Eo regnante bellum inter
Albanos et Romanos exortum est. Ducibus Hostilio et Fufetio placuit rem
paucorum certamine finiri. Erant apud Romanos trigemini fratres Horatii,
tres apud Albanos Curiatii. Cum eis agunt reges ut pro sua quisque
patria dimicent ferro. Foedus ictum est ea lege, ut, unde victoria, ibi
imperium esset.

Icto foedere trigemini arma capiunt et in medium inter duas acies
procedunt. Consederant utrimque duo exercitus. Datur signum, infestique
armis terni iuvenes, magnorum exercituum animos gerentes, concurrunt. Ut
primo concursu increpuere arma micantesque fulsere gladii, horror ingens
spectantes perstringit. Consertis deinde manibus, statim duo Romani
alius super alium exspirantes ceciderunt; tres Albani vulnerati. Ad
casum Romanorum conclamavit gaudio exercitus Albanus. Romanos iam spes
tota deserebat. Unum Horatium tres Curiatii circumsteterant. Forte is
integer fuit; sed quia tribus impar erat, ut distraheret hostes, fugam
capessivit, singulos per intervalla secuturos esse ratus. Iam aliquantum
spatii ex eo loco, ubi pugnatum est, aufugerat, cum respiciens videt
unum e Curiatiis haud procul ab sese abesse. In eum magno impetu redit,
et dum Albanus exercitus inclamat Curiatiis ut opem ferant fratri, iam
Horatius eum occiderat. Alterum deinde, priusquam tertius posset
consequi, interfecit.

Iam singuli supererant, sed nec spe nec viribus pares. Alter erat
intactus ferro et geminata victoria ferox; alter fessum vulnere, fessum
cursu trahebat corpus. Nec illud proelium fuit. Romanus exsultans male
sustinentem arma Curiatium conficit, iacentem spoliat. Romani ovantes ac
gratulantes Horatium accipiunt et domum deducunt. Princeps ibat
Horatius, trium fratrum spolia prae se gerens. Cui obvia fuit soror,
quae desponsa fuerat uni ex Curiatiis, visoque super umeros fratris
paludamento sponsi, quod ipsa confecerat, flere et crines solvere
coepit. Movet ferocis iuvenis animum comploratio sororis in tanto gaudio
publico; itaque stricto gladio transfigit puellam, simul eam verbis
increpans: "Abi hinc cum immaturo amore ad sponsum, oblita fratrum,
oblita patriae. Sic eat, quaecumque Romana lugebit hostem."

Atrox id visum est facinus patribus plebique; quare raptus est in ius
Horatius et apud iudices condemnatus. Iam accesserat lictor iniciebatque
laqueum. Tum Horatius ad populum provocavit. Interea pater Horatii senex
proclamabat filiam suam iure caesam esse; et iuvenem amplexus spoliaque
Curiatiorum ostentans, orabat populum ne se, quem paulo ante cum egregia
stirpe conspexissent, orbum liberis faceret. Non tulit populus patris
lacrimas iuvenemque absolvit admiratione magis virtutis quam iure
causae. Ut tamen caedes manifesta expiaretur, pater quibusdam
sacrificiis peractis transmisit per viam tigillum et filium capite
adoperto velut sub iugum misit; quod tigillum _Sororium_ appellatum est.

Non diu pax Albana mansit; nam Mettius Fufetius, dux Albanorum, cum se
invidiosum apud cives videret, quod bellum uno paucorum certamine
finisset, ut rem corrigeret, Veientes Fidenatesque adversus Romanos
concitavit. Ipse, a Tullo in auxilium arcessitus, aciem in collem
subduxit, ut fortunam belli exspectaret et sequeretur. Qua re Tullus
intellecta magna voce ait suo illud iussu Mettium facere, ut hostes a
tergo circumvenirentur. Quo audito hostes territi et victi sunt. Postero
die Mettius cum ad gratulandum Tullo venisset, iussu illius quadrigis
religatus et in diversa distractus est. Deinde Tullus Albam propter
ducis perfidiam diruit et Albanos Romam transire iussit.

Roma interim crevit Albae ruinis; duplicatus est civium numerus; mons
Caelius urbi additus et, quo frequentius habitaretur, eam sedem Tullus
regiae cepit ibique deinde habitavit. Auctarum virium fiducia elatus
bellum Sabinis indixit. Pestilentia insecuta est; nulla tamen ab armis
quies dabatur. Credebat enim rex bellicosus salubriora militiae quam
domi esse iuvenum corpora, sed ipse quoque diuturno morbo est
implicitus. Tunc vero adeo fracti simul cum corpore sunt spiritus illi
feroces, ut nulli rei posthac nisi sacris operam daret. Memorant Tullum
fulmine ictum cum domo conflagrasse. Tullus magna gloria belli regnavit
annos duos et triginta.


  #IV. Tullus Hostîlius, Rômânôrum rêx tertius# [[as printed]]

  673-641 B.C.

  Mortuô[16] Numâ Tullus Hostîlius rêx creâtus est. Hîc nôn
  sôlum proximô[17] rêgî dissimilis, sed ferôcior etiam Rômulô[18] fuit.
    [[11]]
  Eô rêgnante[1] bellum inter Albânôs et Rômânôs exortum[2] est.
  Ducibus[3] Hostîliô et Fûfetiô placuit rem[4] paucôrum certâmine[5]
  fînîrî. Erant apud Rômânôs trigeminî frâtrês Horâtiî, três apud    {5}
  Albânôs Cûriâtiî. Cum[6] eîs agunt rêgês ut prô suâ quisque
  patriâ dîmicent[7] ferrô. Foedus[8] îctum est eâ[9] lêge, ut, unde[10]
  victôria, ibi imperium esset.

  Îctô foedere trigeminî arma capiunt et in medium inter duâs
  aciês prôcêdunt. Cônsêderant utrimque duo exercitûs. Datur        {10}
  sîgnum, înfêstîque[11] armîs ternî[12] iuvenês, mâgnôrum[13]
      exercituum
  animôs gerentês, concurrunt. Ut prîmô concursû increpuêre[14]
  arma micantêsque fulsêre[15] gladiî, horror ingêns spectantês[16]
  perstringit. Cônsertîs[17] deinde manibus, statim duo Rômânî alius
  super alium exspîrantês cecidêrunt[18]; três Albânî vulnerâtî. Ad[19]
  câsum Rômânôrum conclâmâvit gaudiô exercitus Albânus. Rômânôs     {16}
  iam spês tôta dêserêbat. Ûnum Horâtium três Cûriâtiî
  circumsteterant.[20] Forte[21] is integer fuit; sed quia tribus impâr
  erat, ut distraheret hostês, fugam capessîvit,[22] singulôs[23] per
      intervâlla
    [[12]]
  secûtûrôs esse ratus. Iam aliquantum[1] spatiî ex eô locô,        {20}
  ubi pûgnâtum est, aufûgerat, cum respiciêns videt ûnum ê Cûriâtiîs
  haud procul ab sêsê abesse. In[2] eum mâgnô impetû redit,
  et dum Albânus exercitus inclâmat[3] Cûriâtiîs ut opem ferant
  frâtrî, iam Horâtius eum occîderat. Alterum[4] deinde, priusquam[5]
  tertius posset[5] cônsequî, interfêcit.                           {25}

  Iam singulî[6] supererant,[7] sed nec spê nec vîribus parês.[8]
      Alter[9]
  erat intâctus ferrô et geminâtâ victôriâ ferôx[10]; alter fessum[11]
      vulnere,
  fessum cursû trahêbat[12] corpus. Nec illud proelium fuit.
  Rômânus exsultâns male sustinentem arma Cûriâtium cônficit,[13]
  iacentem[14] spoliat. Rômânî ovantês[15] ac grâtulantês Horâtium  {30}
  accipiunt et domum[16] dêdûcunt. Prînceps îbat Horâtius, trium frâtrum
  spolia prae sê gerêns. Cuî[17] obvia fuit soror, quae dêspônsa
  fuerat ûnî ex Cûriâtiîs, vîsôque[18] super umerôs frâtris palûdâmentô
  spônsî, quod ipsa cônfêcerat, flêre et crînês[19] solvere coepit.
      Movet                                                         {34}
  ferôcis iuvenis animum complôrâtiô sorôris in tantô gaudiô pûblicô;
  itaque strictô[20] gladiô trânsfîgit puellam, simul eam verbîs[21]
      increpâns:                                                    {36}
  "Abî[22] hinc cum immâtûrô amôre ad spônsum, oblîta[23]
    [[13]]
  frâtrum, oblîta patriae. Sîc eat,[1] quaecumque Rômâna lûgêbit
  hostem."

  Atrôx id vîsum est facinus[2] patribus[3] plêbîque; quârê raptus  {40}
  est in iûs[4] Horâtius et apud iûdicês condemnâtus. Iam accesserat
  lîctor[5] iniciêbatque[6] laqueum. Tum Horâtius ad populum prôvocâvit.
  Intereâ pater Horâtiî senex prôclâmâbat fîliam suam iûre
  caesam[7] esse; et iuvenem amplexus[8] spoliaque Cûriâtiôrum
  ostentâns, ôrâbat populum nê[9] sê, quem paulô                    {45}
  ante cum êgregiâ stirpe cônspexissent,[10] orbum
  lîberîs[11] faceret.[9] Nôn tulit populus patris lacrimâs
  iuvenemque[12] absolvit admîrâtiône[13] magis
  virtûtis quam iûre[13] causae. Ut tamen caedês
  manifêsta expiârêtur, pater quibusdam[14] sacrificiîs             {50}
  perâctîs trânsmîsit per viam[15] tigillum et fîlium
  capite adopertô velut sub iugum[16] mîsit; quod
  tigillum _Sorôrium_[17] appellâtum est.

    [Illustration: FASCÊS]

  Nôn diû pâx[18] Albâna mânsit[19]; nam Mettius                    {54}
  Fûfetius, dux Albânôrum, cum[20] sê invidiôsum apud cîvês vidêret,[20]
    [[14]]
  quod[1] bellum ûnô[2] paucôrum certâmine fînîsset, ut[3] rem
      corrigeret,
  Vêientês Fîdênatêsque adversus Rômânôs concitâvit. Ipse,
  â Tullô in[4] auxilium arcessîtus, aciem in collem subdûxit, ut
      fortûnam
  bellî exspectâret et sequerêtur. Quâ[5] rê Tullus intellêctâ      {59}
  mâgnâ vôce ait[6] suô illud iussû Mettium facere, ut hostês â tergô
  circumvenîrentur. Quô audîtô hostês territî et victî sunt. Posterô
  diê Mettius cum ad grâtulandum Tullô vênisset, iussû illîus
  quadrîgîs[7] religâtus et in[8] dîversa distrâctus[9] est. Deinde
      Tullus Albam
  propter ducis perfidiam dîruit et Albânôs Rômam trânsîre iussit.[10]

  Rôma interim crêvit[11] Albae ruînîs[12]; duplicâtus est cîvium   {65}
  numerus; môns Caelius urbî additus et, quô[13] frequentius
  habitârêtur,[13] eam[14] sêdem Tullus rêgiae cêpit ibique deinde
      habitâvit.
  Auctârum[15] vîrium fîdûciâ êlâtus[16] bellum Sabînîs indîxit.
      Pêstilentia
    [[15]]
  însecûta[1] est; nûlla tamen ab armîs quiês dabâtur. Crêdêbat
  enim rêx bellicôsus[2] salûbriôra mîlitiae[3] quam domî esse      {70}
  iuvenum[4] corpora, sed ipse quoque[5] diuturnô morbô est implicitus.
  Tunc vêrô adeô[6] frâctî[7] simul cum corpore sunt spîritûs[8]
  illî ferôcês, ut nûllî reî posthâc nisi sacrîs operam daret. Memorant
  Tullum fulmine[9] îctum cum domô cônflagrâsse. Tullus
  mâgnâ glôriâ bellî rêgnâvit annôs duôs et trîgintâ.               {75}

    [Footnotes: IV (pages 10-15)

    10.16: #Mortuô Numâ#: abl. abs. = _post Numae mortem_.
    10.17: #proximô rêgî#: 'his predecessor.' Join with #dissimilis#,
    which has the same constructions as _similis_ (p. 3, n. 12).
    _Proximus_ may mean 'nearest (in the past)' = 'last,' or 'nearest
    (in the future)' = 'next.' The context must determine the sense.
    10.18: abl. of comparison. H 471 (417): M 615: A 247: G 398:
    B 217.
    11.1: #Eô rêgnante#: 'during his reign.' How does this abl. abs.
    differ from those in I, lines 3, 5, 18, 37, and 40? Cf. p. xxii,
    K 1.
    11.2: _exorior_.
    11.3: #Ducibus . . . placuit#: 'the leaders agreed that,' etc. The
    subject of #placuit# is the clause #rem . . . fînîrî#.
    11.4: The meanings of _rês_ are extremely varied. Here #rem# may
    be translated 'dispute,' and so practically = _bellum_ above. For
    the mood of _fînîrî_, see p. 6, n. 16.
    11.5: The abl. here denotes both the means by which and the manner
    in which the quarrel was to be ended.
    11.6: #Cum . . . rêgês#: 'the kings urge them.' How literally?
    11.7: Cf. p. 1, n. 5.
    11.8: Cf. p. 6, n. 21.
    11.9: #eâ lêge ut#: 'with the understanding that,' 'with the
    proviso (#lêge#) that.' The clause #ut . . . esset# expresses the
    purpose which the leaders had in mind in striking the treaty.
    11.10: Sc. _fuisset_. #unde# = _quâ ex parte_. We would rather
    say, '_on_ which side.' Latin often thus prefers to view an idea
    as one of _motion from_ a place where the English views it rather
    as that of _rest at_ a point. Why?
    11.11: #înfêstî armîs#: 'hostile in (respect of) arms,' i.e. 'with
    hostile arms.'
    11.12: 'three on each side.' Why do we give this meaning to the
    adjective?
    11.13: #mâgnôrum . . . gerentês#: 'breathing the spirit of mighty
    armies.' So we speak of a person as 'a host in himself.'
    11.14: #increpuêre# describes the sound made by the spears as they
    struck the shields.
    11.15: _fulgeô_.
    11.16: = _spectâtôrês_.
    11.17: _cônserô_.
    11.18: _cadô_.
    11.19: #Ad câsum#: we say '_at_ the fall,' but the Latin thinks of
    the shout as rising _against_ (i.e. to greet) the fall.
    11.20: _circumstô_.
    11.21: Cf. p. 5, n. 19.
    11.22: #fugam capessîvit#: 'took (to) flight'; cf. 'to take to
    one's heels.'
    11.23: #singulôs per intervâlla#: 'one by one, at intervals.'
    12.1: #aliquantum spatiî#: 'some distance.' #spatiî# is a
    partitive genitive; #aliquantum# is an acc. of extent of space:
    H 417 (379): M 513: A 257: G 335: B 181.
    12.2: #In . . . redit# (_redeô_): 'he turned and made a furious
    attack upon him.' How literally?
    12.3: #inclâmat . . . ferant#: 'was shouting . . . (bidding them)
    to bear aid.' For #inclâmat#, see p. 3, n. 14.
    12.4: = _secundum_, as often.
    12.5: H 605, II (520, 2): M 880: A 327: G 577: B 292.
    12.6: 'one on each side.' Cf. _ternî_, l. 11, and note there.
    12.7: _supersum_.
    12.8: 'equally matched.'
    12.9: #alter . . . alter#: 'the one . . . the other (of the two).'
    With #intâctus# cf. _integer_, l. 18.
    12.10: 'inspirited, emboldened.'
    12.11: The repetition of #fessum# gives emphasis by dwelling upon
    the fact.
    12.12: 'was dragging,' i.e. instead of moving with life and vigor.
    We would rather say, 'could barely drag his body along.' So we
    would render #male sustinentem arma#, l. 29, as 'barely able to
    endure (the weight of) his armor.'
    12.13: = _occidit_.
    12.14: 'as he lay prostrate.'
    12.15: #ovantês ac grâtulantês#: 'with rejoicing and
    congratulations.' Participles, like adjectives, may have adverbial
    force.
    12.16: accus. of limit of motion; cf. p. 3, n. 4.
    12.17: Cf. p. 4, n. 3.
    12.18: #vîsô . . . spônsî#: 'when she saw her lover's cloak,' etc.
    Cf. p. 1, n. 4.
    12.19: #crînês solvere#: a common token of grief among the Romans.
    Cf. _crinibus passîs_, II, 36.
    12.20: _stringô_.
    12.21: #verbîs increpâns#: cf. _hîs increpâns verbîs_, I, 46.
    12.22: _abeô_.
    12.23: #oblîta# (_oblivîscor_) #frâtrum#: 'you who have
    forgotten,' or 'since you have forgotten.' For the genitives
    #frâtrum# and #patriae#, see H 454 (406, II): M 588: A 219: G 376:
    B 206, 1. Cf. the English 'forgetful of.' For the repetition of
    #oblîta# see n. 11.
    13.1: 'fare, perish.' The subject is _fêmina_, or _illa fêmina_,
    as suggested by #quaecumque#. How? With the whole sentence cf.
    _Sîc . . . mea_, I, 47, and see note there.
    13.2: #facinus#, by its derivation from _faciô_, properly =
    'a deed,' whether good or bad, but generally 'a crime.'
    13.3: = _senâtôribus_, who were officially styled _Patrês
    Cônscrîptî_. #patribus plêbîque# virtually = _omnibus_.
    13.4: 'court.'
    13.5: See Vocab., _lîctor_.
    13.6: The tense has dramatic force and = 'was (actually)
    putting on.'
    13.7: _caedô_.
    13.8: _amplector_.
    13.9: clause of negative purpose: see p. 9, n. 6.
    13.10: _cônspiciô_. The subjunctive may be explained (1) as caused
    by attraction to #faceret#, H 652, 1 (529, II): M 793: A 342:
    G 663: B 324, or (2) as in informal indir. disc.
    13.11: abl. of separation (cf. p. 1, n. 6), to be joined with
    #orbum faceret#, which = _orbâret_.
    13.12: After a negative clause the Romans often use _que_ or _et_,
    where the English idiom requires _but_.
    13.13: why abl.? see p. 4, n. 1.
    13.14: Cf. p. 6, n. 21.
    13.15: 'a (certain) street.' The street referred to ran up the
    slope of the Esquiline Hill.
    13.16: See Vocab., _iugum_. The father of Horatius, by making him
    pass, as it were, beneath the yoke, symbolically executed the
    sentence of death passed by the judges.
    13.17: Sc. _Tigillum_. Livy says that this beam was renewed from
    time to time at public expense, even down to his own day. Another
    memorial of this fight was the _Pîla_ ('Column') _Horâtia_,
    adjoining the Forum, on which Horatius is said to have hung the
    spoils taken from the Curiatii.
    13.18: #pâx Albâna# = _pâx cum Albâ îcta_.
    13.19: _maneô_.
    13.20: #cum . . . vidêret#: subjunctive of cause. See p. 2, n. 13;
    p. 4, n. 12; and p. xx, H 2.
    14.1: #quod . . . fînîsset#: 'because (as they said),' etc. The
    subjunctive is due to the implied indirect discourse, and
    expresses the thought, not of the writer, but of Mettius'
    subjects. See p. xxi, H 4.
    14.2: #ûnô . . . certâmine#: 'by one contest (only), and that a
    contest in which but few fought.' Cf. l. 4.
    14.3: #ut . . . corrigeret#: 'to set the matter straight,' i.e. to
    regain the good will of his people. Join this clause with what
    follows.
    14.4: #in auxilium#: 'to give aid,' an expression of purpose.
    Cf. _ad supplicium_, I, 29, and note. Tullus summoned Mettius
    in accordance with the treaty made before the fight between the
    Horatii and the Curiatii (l. 7).
    14.5: #Quâ rê . . . intellêctâ# (_intellegô_): 'when he noticed
    this state of things.' For #quâ#, see p. 4, n. 3.
    14.6: #ait . . . circumvenîrentur#: Tullus' purpose in making this
    statement was partly to frighten the enemy, partly to reassure his
    own men. Livy relates that Tullus had stationed his own forces
    against the Veientes, the Albans against the Fidenates. The
    withdrawal of Mettius exposed the flank of the Romans to attack
    from the Fidenates, and so was regarded at once by the Romans as
    proof of treachery.
    14.7: abl. of separation (cf. p. 1, n. 6). _ligâre_ and its
    compounds are construed with either (1) the simple ablative, or
    (2) the ablative with _ab_, _dê_, or _ex_.
    14.8: #in . . . est#: 'was torn limb from limb.'
    14.9: _distrahô_.
    14.10: _iubeô_.
    14.11: _crêscô_.
    14.12: abl. of means.
    14.13: #quô . . . habitârêtur#: 'that it might be more densely
    inhabited,' i.e. that a larger number of people might be induced
    to live there. In purpose clauses containing a comparative, _quô_
    is used instead of _ut_: H 568, 7 (497, 2): M 909: A 317, _b_:
    G 545, 2; B 282, _a_. This _quô_ is the abl. sing. neut. of the
    relative pronoun, and = _ut eô_, 'that thereby.'
    14.14: #eam . . . cêpit# (_capiô_): 'Tullus chose it (the
    mountain) as the site of his palace,' Why is #eam# feminine,
    although referring to _môns Caelius_, which is masculine? Cf.
    p. 5, n. 14.
    14.15: #Auctârum . . . fîdûciâ#: 'because of the confidence
    (begotten) of his increased strength,' or 'by his confidence in
    his increased strength.' In the former case the gen. is
    subjective; in the latter it is objective; H 440, 1 and 2 (396, II
    and III): M 553, 571: A 213, 1, 2: G 363, 1 and 2: B 199, 200.
    14.16: _efferô_.
    15.1: _însequor_.
    15.2: #bellicôsus# = a causal clause _quod ipse bellicôsus erat_.
    15.3: #mîlitiae quam domî#: 'in war than in peace.' See H 484, 2
    (426, 2): M 622: A 258, _d_: G. 411, R. 2: B 232, 2; xvi, A 1.
    15.4: = 'the fighting men,' because _iuvenês_ (men under 45) were
    eligible for military duty.
    15.5: #sed ipse quoque#: 'but (i.e. in spite of this statement) he
    too.'
    15.6: 'so completely.'
    15.7: _frangô_.
    15.8: #spîritûs illî ferôcês#: 'that high spirit of his'; #illî# =
    'that for which he was so famous.' Cf. l. 2.
    15.9: #fulmine îctum . . . cônflagrâsse# = _fulmine îctum esse et
    cônflagrâsse_. Instead of using two coördinated verbs with a
    common subject, Latin regularly represents the first verb by a
    perf. pass. part., or by the past part. of a deponent verb, in
    agreement with that common subject. Cf. p. 2, n. 8, and p. xxiv,
    L 5.]


#V. Ancus Marcius, Romanorum rex quartus# [[stripped text]]

641-616 B.C.

Tullo mortuo Ancum Marcium regem populus creavit. Numae Pompilii nepos
Ancus Marcius erat, aequitate et religione avo similis. Tunc Latini, cum
quibus Tullo regnante ictum foedus erat, sustulerant animos, et
incursionem in agrum Romanum fecerunt. Ancus, priusquam eis bellum
indiceret, legatum misit, qui res repeteret, eumque morem posteri
acceperunt. Id autem hoc modo fiebat. Legatus, ubi ad fines eorum venit
a quibus res repetuntur, capite velato "Audi, Iuppiter," inquit "audite,
fines huius populi. Ego sum publicus nuntius populi Romani; verbis meis
fides sit." Deinde peragit postulata. Si non deduntur res quas exposcit,
hastam in fines hostium emittit bellumque ita indicit. Legatus, qui ea
de re mittitur, _Fetialis_ ritusque belli indicendi _Ius Fetiale_
appellatur.

Legato Romano res repetenti superbe responsum est a Latinis; quare
bellum hoc modo eis indictum est. Ancus, exercitu conscripto, profectus
Latinos fudit et compluribus oppidis deletis cives Romam traduxit. Cum
autem in tanta hominum multitudine facinora clandestina fierent, Ancus
carcerem in media urbe ad terrorem increscentis audaciae aedificavit.
Idem nova moenia urbi circumdedit, Ianiculum montem ponte sublicio in
Tiberi facto urbi coniunxit, in ore Tiberis Ostiam urbem condidit.
Pluribus aliis rebus intra paucos annos confectis; immatura morte
praereptus obiit.


  #V. Ancus Mârcius, Rômânôrum rêx quârtus# [[as printed]]

  641-616 B.C.

    [Illustration: NUMA AND ANCUS MÂRCIUS]

  Tullô mortuô[10] Ancum Mârcium rêgem[11]
  populus creâvit. Numae Pompiliî nepôs
  Ancus Mârcius erat, aequitâte[12] et
  religiône[12] avô similis. Tunc Latînî, cum quibus
  Tullô rêgnante îctum foedus erat,                                  {5}
  sustulerant[13] animôs, et incursiônem in agrum
  Rômânum fêcêrunt. Ancus, priusquam[14] eîs
  bellum indîceret,[14] lêgâtum mîsit, quî[15] rês
    [[16]]
  repeteret, eumque[1] môrem posterî accêpêrunt. Id autem hôc
  modô fîêbat. Lêgâtus, ubi ad fînês eôrum venit â quibus rês       {10}
  repetuntur, capite[2] vêlâtô "Audî, Iuppiter," inquit[3] "audîte,
  fînês hûius[4] populî. Ego sum pûblicus[5] nûntius populî Rômânî;
  verbîs[6] meîs fidês sit." Deinde peragit pôstulâta. Sî nôn dêduntur
  rês quâs expôscit, hastam in fînês hostium êmittit bellumque
  ita indîcit. Lêgâtus, quî eâ dê rê mittitur, _Fêtiâlis_[7] rîtusque
      bellî                                                         {15}
  indîcendî _Iûs Fêtiâle_ appellâtur.

    [Illustration: CARCER MAMERTÎNUS]

  Lêgâtô Rômânô rês repetentî superbê respônsum[8] est â Latînîs;
  quârê bellum hôc[9] modô eîs indictum est. Ancus, exercitû
  cônscrîptô, profectus[10] Latînôs fûdit et
  complûribus oppidîs dêlêtîs cîvês Rômam                           {20}
  trâdûxit[11]. Cum[12] autem in tantâ hominum
  multitûdine facinora clandestîna
  fierent, Ancus carcerem[13] in mediâ urbe
  ad[14] terrôrem incrêscentis audâciae aedificâvit.
  Îdem nova moenia urbî circumdedit,                                {25}
  Iâniculum montem ponte[15] subliciô
    [[17]]
  in Tiberî factô urbî côniûnxit, in ôre[1] Tiberis Ôstiam urbem
  condidit. Plûribus aliîs rêbus intrâ paucôs annôs cônfectîs;
  immâtûrâ morte praereptus obiit.                                  {29}

    [Footnotes: V (pages 15-17)

    15.10: What is the force of this abl. abs.?
    15.11: #rêgem populus creâvit#: This phrase, as it stands, is
    somewhat misleading. As a matter of fact, the kingship was neither
    hereditary nor elective. On the death of a king an _interrêx_, or
    regent, was chosen, who took the auspices, and the augurs inferred
    from the signs that the gods favored a certain candidate. He was
    then elected by the Assembly, and the choice was confirmed by the
    Senate.
    15.12: abl. of specification.
    15.13: #sustulerant# (_tollô_) #animôs#: 'had plucked up courage.'
    15.14: Cf. _priusquam . . . posset_, IV, 25, and note.
    15.15: #quî . . . repeteret#: relative clause of purpose. _Rês
    repetere_ = 'to demand the (stolen) things,' is a technical phrase
    of war, and = 'to demand restitution or satisfaction.' The
    opposite is _rês reddere_, or _rês dêdere_, as in l. 13.
    16.1: #eum môrem . . . accêpêrunt#: 'that custom posterity (the
    Romans of later times) adopted.' Traces of the custom appear as
    late as the reign of Augustus.
    16.2: While praying, the Romans covered their faces with a fold of
    the toga, that no untoward sight might interrupt their devotions.
    The _lêgâtus_ here covers his face, because he is praying to
    Jupiter and to the #fînês#, which are personified.
    16.3: This word, rather than _dîxit_, is used with direct
    discourse, and regularly stands, as here, _within_ the quotation.
    16.4: The _lêgâtus_, of course, said _fînês Albânôrum_, or
    _Vêientium_, as the case might be.
    16.5: 'official,' i.e. duly accredited.
    16.6: #verbîs . . . sit# = _verbîs meîs crêdite_. Cf. II, 48, _cuî
    reî fidem fêcit_. #sit# is a hortatory subjunctive; H 559, 1
    (484, II): M 713: A 266: G 263: B 274.
    16.7: See Vocab., _fêtiâlis_.
    16.8: #respônsum . . . Latînîs# = _Latînî respondêrunt_. The
    impersonal passive is common.
    16.9: #hôc#: 'described _above_,' in lines 9-16. In l. 9 _hôc_ =
    'described _below_.' _Hîc_ more often bears the latter sense, i.e.
    it refers to what follows.
    16.10: #profectus . . . fûdit# (_fundô_): cf. p. 15, n. 9.
    16.11: 'transferred, removed.'
    16.12: #Cum . . . fierent#: a causal clause; cf. p. 13, n. 20.
    16.13: See Vocab., _carcer_.
    16.14: #ad . . . audâciae# = _ut incrêscentem audâciam terrêret_.
    Cf. p. 3, n. 8, and _ad congressum deae_, III, 33. #audâciae# is
    objective genitive: cf. p. 14, n. 15.
    16.15: #ponte subliciô#: abl. abs., with #factô#, expressing
    means. This bridge, the earliest and most famous of the bridges
    over the Tiber, derived its name from the circumstance that it was
    always made of wood and supported on piles (_sublicae_). It is
    this bridge that figures so largely in Macaulay's _Lays of Ancient
    Rome_, Horatius, stanzas xxix. ff.
    17.1: #in ôre#: 'at the mouth.' The town Ostia got its name from
    its position _in ôre Tiberis_. It was the port of Rome, and thus
    attained great importance. Great harbors were built there in the
    days of the Empire, the remains of which, as well as of the
    warehouses built for the storage of merchandise from abroad, are
    still visible.]


#VI. Lucius Tarquinius Priscus, Romanorum rex quintus# [[stripped text]]

616-578 B.C.

Anco regnante Lucius Tarquinius, Tarquiniis, ex Etruriae urbe,
profectus, cum coniuge et fortunis omnibus Romam commigravit. Additur
haec fabula: advenienti aquila pilleum sustulit et super carpentum, cui
Tarquinius insidebat, cum magno clangore volitans rursus capiti apte
reposuit; inde sublimis abiit. Tanaquil coniux, caelestium prodigiorum
perita, regnum ei portendi intellexit; itaque, virum complexa, excelsa
et alta sperare eum iussit. Has spes cogitationesque secum portantes
urbem ingressi sunt, domicilioque ibi comparato Tarquinius pecunia et
industria dignitatem atque etiam Anci regis familiaritatem consecutus
est; a quo tutor liberis relictus regnum intercepit et ita
administravit, quasi iure adeptus esset.

Tarquinius Priscus Latinos bello domuit; Circum Maximum aedificavit; de
Sabinis triumphavit; murum lapideum urbi circumdedit. Equitum centurias
duplicavit, nomina mutare non potuit, deterritus, ut ferunt, Atti Navii
auctoritate. Attus enim, ea tempestate augur inclitus, id fieri posse
negabat, nisi aves addixissent; iratus rex in experimentum artis eum
interrogavit, fierine posset quod ipse mente concepisset; Attus augurio
acto fieri posse respondit. "Atqui hoc" inquit rex "agitabam, num cotem
illam secare novacula possem." "Potes ergo" inquit augur, et rex
secuisse dicitur. Tarquinius filium tredecim annorum, quod in proelio
hostem percussisset, praetexta bullaque donavit; unde haec ingenuorum
puerorum insignia esse coeperunt.

Supererant duo Anci filii, qui, aegre ferentes se paterno regno
fraudatos esse, regi insidias paraverunt. Ex pastoribus duos
ferocissimos deligunt ad patrandum facinus. Ei simulata rixa in
vestibulo regiae tumultuantur. Quorum clamor cum penitus in regiam
pervenisset, vocati ad regem pergunt. Primo uterque vociferari coepit et
certatim alter alteri obstrepere. Cum vero iussi essent in vicem dicere,
unus ex composito rem orditur; dumque intentus in eum se rex totus
avertit, alter elatam securim in eius caput deiecit, et relicto in
vulnere telo ambo foras se proripiunt.


  #VI. Lûcius Tarquinius Prîscus, Rômânôrum rêx quîntus# [[as printed]]

  616-578 B.C.

  Ancô rêgnante Lûcius Tarquinius, Tarquiniîs,[2] ex Etrûriae urbe,
  profectus,[3] cum coniuge et fortûnîs omnibus Rômam commigrâvit.
  Additur haec fâbula: advenientî[4] aquila pilleum sustulit[5] et super
  carpentum,[6] cuî[7] Tarquinius însidêbat, cum mâgnô clangôre volitâns
  rûrsus[8] capitî[9] aptê reposuit; inde sublîmis[10] abiit. Tanaquil
  coniux, caelestium[11] prôdigiôrum perîta, rêgnum[12] eî portendî  {6}
  intellêxit; itaque, virum complexa, excelsa[13] et alta[13] spêrâre
    [[18]]
  eum iussit. Hâs spês côgitâtiônêsque sêcum portantês urbem
  ingressî[1] sunt, domiciliôque ibi comparâtô Tarquinius pecûniâ et
  indûstriâ dîgnitâtem atque etiam Ancî rêgis familiâritâtem        {10}
  cônsecûtus[2] est; â quô tûtor lîberîs relîctus[3] rêgnum intercêpit
      et ita
  administrâvit, quasi[4] iûre adeptus[5] esset.

    [Illustration: AUGUR]

  Tarquinius Prîscus Latînôs bellô domuit; Circum[6] Mâximum
  aedificâvit; dê[7] Sabînîs triumphâvit; mûrum[8] lapideum urbî
  circumdedit. Equitum centuriâs[9] duplicâvit,                     {15}
  nômina mûtâre nôn potuit, dêterritus, ut ferunt,
  Attî Nâviî auctôritate. Attus enim, eâ
  tempestâte[10] augur inclitus, id fierî posse negâbat,
  nisi[11] avês addîxissent[11]; îrâtus rêx in[12]
  experîmentum artis eum interrogâvit, fierîne posset[13]           {20}
  quod ipse mente concêpisset[14]; Attus auguriô
  âctô fierî posse respondit. "Atquî hôc"[15] inquit
  rêx "agitâbam, num côtem illam secâre
  novâculâ possem."[13] "Potes[16] ergô" inquit
  augur, et rêx secuisse dîcitur. Tarquinius fîlium tredecim        {25}
  annôrum,[17] quod in proeliô hostem percussisset,[18] praetextâ[19]
    [[19]]
  bullâque[1] dônâvit; unde[2] haec[3] ingenuôrum puerôrum însîgnia esse
  coepêrunt.

  Supererant[4] duo Ancî fîliî, quî, aegrê ferentês sê paternô[5]
  rêgnô fraudâtôs esse,[6] rêgî însidiâs parâvêrunt. Ex pâstôribus  {30}
  duôs ferôcissimôs dêligunt ad patrandum facinus. Eî simulâtâ
  rixâ in vêstibulô rêgiae tumultuantur. Quôrum[7] clâmor cum[8]
  penitus in rêgiam pervênisset, vocâtî ad rêgem pergunt. Prîmô
  uterque vôciferârî coepit et certâtim[9] alter alterî obstrepere.
  Cum vêrô iussî essent in vicem dîcere, ûnus ex[10] compositô rem  {35}
  ôrdîtur; dumque intentus in eum sê rêx tôtus âvertit, alter
  êlâtam[11] secûrim in êius caput dêiêcit, et relîctô[12] in vulnere
  têlô ambô forâs sê prôripiunt.

    [Footnotes: VI (pages 17-19)

    17.2: #Tarquiniîs . . . urbe#: 'from Tarquinii, a city of
    Etruria.' Cf. p. 8, n. 5.
    17.3: _proficîscor_.
    17.4: Sc. _Rômam_: 'while on his way to Rome.' The participle
    agrees with _eî_ understood, which is a dat. of separation, or
    disadvantage, with #sustulit#: H 427 (385, 2): M 539: A 229:
    G 345, R. 1: B 188, 2, _d_.
    17.5: _tollô_.
    17.6: A two-wheeled carriage, with curtains and an awning.
    17.7: #cuî#: 'in which.' Why dat.?
    17.8: #rûrsus . . . reposuit#: since _repônô_ = 'to put _back_,'
    or 'to place _again_,' #rûrsus# is unnecessary.
    17.9: More often _repônô_ is followed by _in_ with the abl., or
    the acc.
    17.10: #sublîmis abiit#: 'flew high up in the air and departed.'
    17.11: #caelestium . . . perîta#: 'skilled in (interpreting)
    portents from heaven.' The Romans regarded the Etruscans as
    exceptionally skillful in such matters. For the gen., see H 451, 1
    (399, I, 2). M 573: A 218, _a_: G 374: B 204, 1.
    17.12: #rêgnum eî portendî intellêxit#: 'perceived that the sign
    indicated that he was to be king.' How literally? According to
    Livy, the significance of the omen lay in these facts: It came
    from a favorable quarter of the sky (which, to the Romans, was the
    east); it concerned his _head_, the _supreme_ part of his being;
    hence the removal of his cap by the eagle, the bird of Jupiter,
    'king of gods and men,' and its restoration, implied that his
    _cap_ was to be removed and replaced by a _crown_.
    17.13: neuter plural adjectives, used as nouns: 'an exalted
    destiny.'
    18.1: _ingredior_.
    18.2: _cônsequor_.
    18.3: _relinquô_.
    18.4: H 584 (513, II): M 944, 945: A 312, and N. 1: G 602 and R.:
    B 307.
    18.5: _adipîscor_.
    18.6: #Circum Mâximum#: see map, p. xxviii. In its final form it
    could accommodate nearly 300,000 spectators. The Romans of the
    Empire were passionately devoted to the chariot races of the
    circus. For a good description of a Roman circus, see Lew
    Wallace's _Ben Hur_, Book V, Chap. XII.
    18.7: #dê Sabînîs triumphâvit#: 'he triumphed over'; lit., 'he got
    a triumph out of.' See Vocab., _triumphus_.
    18.8: #mûrum . . . circumdedit#: 'he built a stone wall round the
    city.' According to Livy, the wall was merely begun by Tarquin and
    finished by his successor, Servius Tullius.
    18.9: Cf. II, 42. Livy says that when Romulus formed the three
    centuries of horsemen he called one _Ramnês_, after his own name,
    another _Titiênsês_, after King Tatius. Tarquin desired to name
    the new centuries after himself.
    18.10: = _tempore_.
    18.11: #nisi . . . addîxissent#: 'unless the birds gave consent,'
    i.e. without taking the _auspicia_ and finding them favorable. Cf.
    I, 42. The subjunctive is due to the indirect discourse. For the
    tense, see p. 6, n. 1.
    18.12: #in experîmentum artis#: 'to test his art.' Cf. p. 14,
    n. 4.
    18.13: Cf. Cf.] p. 3, n. 2.
    18.14: Cf. p. 6, n. 1. The king said '_Potestne fierî quod in
    mente concêpî?_'
    18.15: #hôc# is emphatic, 'Ah, but what I had in mind was _this_.'
    18.16: #Potes ergô#: 'well, you can.'
    18.17: descriptive gen.: H 440, 3 (396, V): M 558: A 215: G 365:
    B 203.
    18.18: Cf. p. 14, n. 1.
    18.19: Sc. _togâ_.
    19.1: See Vocab., _bulla_.
    19.2: = _ex quô_: 'in consequence of this circumstance.'
    19.3: Cf. p. 5, n. 14, and p. 16, n. 9.
    19.4: 'were still alive.'
    19.5: = _patris_. Cf. the use of _rêgius_, I, 17.
    19.6: The infinitive depends on #aegrê ferentês#. Phrases
    expressive of emotion, whether of joy or of sorrow, are often
    followed by the infinitive with subject accus.
    19.7: Cf. p. 4, n. 3.
    19.8: The conjunction of the subordinate clause is often preceded
    by one or two words, sometimes by a larger number.
    19.9: #certâtim . . . obstrepere#: 'to (try to) drown each other's
    voices'; lit., 'in eager rivalry to make noise one against (_ob_)
    the other.' Why is _alterî_ dative?
    19.10: #ex compositô#: 'according to previous agreement.'
    19.11: #êlâtam secûrim . . . dêiêcit# = _extulit_ ('raised') _et
    dêiêcit_. Cf. p. 2, n. 8.
    19.12: #relîctô . . . têlô#: we say, 'leaving the weapon--they
    flee,' i.e. we treat the two actions as simultaneous. The Romans
    say more exactly: 'having left--they flee,' i.e. the act of
    leaving is viewed as prior to that of flight.]


#VII. Servius Tullius, Romanorum rex sextus# [[stripped text]]

578-534 B.C.

Post hunc Servius Tullius suscepit imperium, genitus ex nobili femina,
captiva tamen et famula. Qui cum in domo Tarquinii Prisci educaretur,
ferunt prodigium visu eventuque mirabile accidisse. Flammae species
pueri dormientis caput amplexa est. Hoc visu Tanaquil summam ei
dignitatem portendi intellexit coniugique suasit ut eum haud secus ac
suos liberos educaret. Is postquam adolevit, et fortitudine et consilio
insignis fuit. In proelio quodam, in quo rex Tarquinius adversus Sabinos
conflixit, militibus segnius dimicantibus, raptum signum in hostem
misit. Cuius recipiendi gratia Romani tam acriter pugnaverunt, ut et
signum et victoriam referrent. Quare a Tarquinio gener adsumptus est; et
cum Tarquinius occisus esset, Tanaquil, Tarquinii uxor, mortem eius
celavit, populumque ex superiore parte aedium adlocuta ait regem grave
quidem, sed non letale vulnus accepisse, eumque petere, ut interim dum
convalesceret, Servio Tullio dicto audientes essent. Sic Servius Tullius
regnare coepit, sed recte imperium administravit. Sabinos subegit;
montes tres, Quirinalem, Viminalem, Esquilinum urbi adiunxit; fossas
circa murum duxit. Idem censum ordinavit, et populum in classes et
centurias distribuit.

Servius Tullius aliquod urbi decus addere volebat. Iam tum inclitum erat
Dianae Ephesiae fanum. Id communiter a civitatibus Asiae factum fama
ferebat. Itaque Latinorum populis suasit ut et ipsi fanum Dianae cum
populo Romano Romae in Aventino monte aedificarent. Quo facto, bos mirae
magnitudinis cuidam Latino nata dicitur, et responsum somnio datum eum
populum summam imperii habiturum, cuius civis bovem illam Dianae
immolasset. Latinus bovem ad fanum Dianae egit et causam sacerdoti
Romano exposuit. Ille callidus dixit prius eum vivo flumine manus
abluere debere. Latinus dum ad Tiberim descendit, sacerdos bovem
immolavit. Ita imperium civibus sibique gloriam adquisivit.

Servius Tullius filiam alteram ferocem, mitem alteram habens, cum
Tarquinii filios pari esse animo videret, ferocem miti, mitem feroci in
matrimonium dedit, ne duo violenta ingenia matrimonio iungerentur. Sed
mites seu forte seu fraude perierunt; feroces morum similitudo
coniunxit. Statim Tarquinius a Tullia incitatus advocato senatu regnum
paternum repetere coepit. Qua re audita Servius dum ad Curiam contendit,
iussu Tarquinii per gradus deiectus et domum refugiens interfectus est.
Tullia carpento vecta in Forum properavit et coniugem e Curia evocatum
prima regem salutavit; cuius iussu cum e turba ac tumultu decessisset
domumque rediret, viso patris corpore, cunctantem et frena mulionem
inhibentem super ipsum corpus carpentum agere iussit, unde vicus ille
Sceleratus dictus est. Servius Tullius regnavit annos quattuor et
quadraginta.


  #VII. Servius Tullius, Rômânôrum rêx sextus# [[as printed]]

  578-534 B.C.

  Post hunc Servius Tullius suscêpit imperium, genitus ex nôbilî
  fêminâ,[13] captîvâ tamen et famulâ. Quî cum in domô Tarquiniî
  Prîscî êducârêtur, ferunt[14] prôdigium[15] vîsû êventûque mîrâbile
    [[20]]
  accidisse. Flammae[1] speciês puerî dormientis caput amplexa est.
  Hôc vîsû Tanaquil summam[2] eî dîgnitâtem portendî intellêxit      {5}
  coniugîque suâsit ut[3] eum haud secus ac suôs lîberôs[4]
  êducâret.[3] Is postquam adolêvit, et fortitûdine et cônsiliô
  însîgnis fuit. In proeliô quôdam,[5] in quô rêx Tarquinius
  adversus Sabînôs cônflîxit, mîlitibus[6] sêgnius
  dîmicantibus, raptum[7] sîgnum in hostem mîsit. Cûius[8]          {10}
  recipiendî grâtiâ Rômânî tam âcriter pûgnâvêrunt, ut et
  sîgnum et victôriam referrent. Quârê â Tarquiniô gener
  adsûmptus est; et cum Tarquinius occîsus esset, Tanaquil,
  Tarquiniî uxor, mortem êius cêlâvit, populumque
  ex superiôre[9] parte aedium adlocûta[10] ait rêgem grave         {15}
  quidem, sed nôn lêtâle vulnus accêpisse, eumque petere, ut
  interim dum convalêsceret,[11] Serviô Tulliô[12] dictô audientês
      essent.
  Sîc[13] Servius Tullius rêgnâre coepit, sed rêctê imperium
      administrâvit.
  Sabînôs subêgit[14]; montês três, Quirînâlem, Vîminâlem, Êsquilînum
  urbî adiûnxit; fossâs[15] circâ mûrum dûxit. Îdem cênsum[16]      {20}
  ôrdinâvit, et populum in classês[17] et centuriâs[18] distribuit.

    [Illustration: SIGNUM]

    [[21]]
  Servius Tullius aliquod urbî decus addere volêbat. Iam[1] tum
  inclitum erat Diânae Ephesiae fânum.[2] Id commûniter[3] â cîvitâtibus
  Asiae factum fâma ferêbat. Itaque Latînôrum
  populîs suâsit ut et[4] ipsî fânum Diânae                         {25}
  cum[5] populô Rômânô Rômae in Aventînô monte
  aedificârent. Quô[6] factô, bôs mîrae mâgnitûdinis[7]
  cuîdam Latînô nâta[8] dîcitur, et respônsum somniô
  datum[8] eum populum summam imperiî habitûrum,[8]
  cûius cîvis bovem illam Diânae immolâsset.[9]                     {30}
  Latînus[10] bovem ad fânum Diânae êgit et causam
  sacerdôtî Rômânô exposuit. Ille callidus[11] dîxit
  prius eum vîvô flûmine manûs abluere dêbêre.
  Latînus dum ad Tiberim[12] dêscendit, sacerdôs bovem immolâvit.
  Ita imperium cîvibus sibique glôriam adquîsîvit.                  {35}

    [Illustration: DIANA OF EPHESUS]

    [Illustration: SACRIFICE]

  Servius Tullius fîliam alteram ferôcem, mîtem alteram habêns,[13]
  cum Tarquiniî fîliôs parî esse animô[14] vidêret, ferôcem[15] mîtî,
  mîtem ferôcî in mâtrimônium dedit, nê duo violenta ingenia
    [[22]]
  mâtrimôniô iungerentur. Sed mîtês seu forte seu fraude periêrunt;
  ferôcês môrum similitûdô coniûnxit. Statim Tarquinius             {40}
  â Tulliâ[1] incitâtus advocâtô[2] senâtû rêgnum
  paternum repetere coepit. Quâ[3] rê
  audîtâ Servius dum ad Cûriam contendit,
  iussû Tarquiniî per gradûs[4] dêiectus et
  domum refugiêns interfectus est. Tullia                           {45}
  carpentô vecta in Forum properâvit et
  côniugem ê Cûriâ êvocâtum prîma rêgem
  salûtâvit; cûius iussû cum ê turbâ ac
  tumultû dêcessisset[5] domumque redîret,
  vîsô patris corpore, cunctantem et frêna mûliônem inhibentem      {50}
  super ipsum[6] corpus carpentum agere iussit, unde[7] vîcus ille
  Scelerâtus dictus est. Servius Tullius rêgnâvit annôs quattuor et
  quadrâgintâ.

    [Footnotes: VII (pages 19-22)

    19.13: Livy relates that at the capture of the Latin town
    Corniculum, Servius' father was killed and his mother taken
    prisoner. Out of respect to her high rank, Tanaquil set her free
    and welcomed her to the palace. There Servius was born, and he was
    brought up in Tarquin's household.
    19.14: #ferunt . . . accidisse#: in English, the verb
    corresponding to #ferunt# would be parenthetical, thus:
    'a prodigy, _they say_, happened.'
    19.15: #prôdigium . . . mîrâbile#: 'a prodigy, strange to look
    upon, and marvelously fulfilled.' #vîsû# and #êventû# are
    ablatives of specification to #mîrâbile#: H 480 (424): M 650:
    A 253: G 397: B 226, 1.
    20.1: #Flammae speciês#: 'the semblance of fire.' We may render
    the whole sentence, 'Fire seemed to envelop,' etc.
    20.2: #summam . . . intellêxit#: cf. p. 17, n. 12.
    20.3: Cf. p. 1, n. 5.
    20.4: governed by _êducâbat_ understood.
    20.5: _quîdam_ and _ûnus_ often have no more force than the
    English indefinite article.
    20.6: #mîlitibus . . . dîmicantibus#: causal.
    20.7: #raptum . . . mîsit#: cf. p. 2, n. 8. To lose the standard
    was as much of a disgrace then as it is now to lose the flag.
    20.8: #Cûius . . . grâtiâ#: an expression of purpose = _quod ut
    reciperet_.
    20.9: Roman houses in general had no windows on the ground floor.
    20.10: Cf. p. 19, n. 12.
    20.11: H 603, 2 (519, 2): M 921: A 328: G 572: B 293, III, 2, and
    p. xx, G 3.
    20.12: dat. with #dictô audientês essent#, which together =
    _pârêrent_: H 426 (385, I): M 530: A 227 and N. 2: G 346 and N. 5:
    B 187, II. #dictô# is dat. with #audientês#, which here itself =
    'obeying.'
    20.13: i.e. instead of being formally chosen king by the senate
    and people (p. 15, n. 11).
    20.14: _subigô_.
    20.15: #fossâs . . . dûxit#: this statement harmonizes with VI,
    14: see note there. Remains of the wall and ditch are extant,
    especially along the east side of the Esquiline, Viminal, and
    Quirinal hills.
    20.16: The census was not, as with us, a mere enumeration of the
    inhabitants, but an enrollment and classification of them
    according to property for purposes of taxation and military
    service. Hence the clause #in . . . distribuit# is in part an
    explanation of #cênsum ôrdinâvit#.
    20.17: These classes were six in number.
    20.18: According to Livy, there were 193 centuries. At elections
    each century cast a single vote, the opinion of the majority of
    its members being regarded as the voice of the whole century. The
    first, or richest class, contained 98 centuries, and so controlled
    98 votes, more than a majority.
    21.1: #Iam tum#: 'even in those early days.'
    21.2: This temple was one of the seven wonders of the ancient
    world. See Acts xix, 24 f.
    21.3: #commûniter . . . factum# (_esse_): 'that the states of Asia
    had united in building it.' How literally?
    21.4: #et ipsî# = _etiam ipsî_, or _ipsî quoque_: 'they too,' i.e.
    as well as the _cîvitâtês Asiae_.
    21.5: 'in conjunction with.' The whole might have been expressed
    thus: _ut illî_ (i.e. the _Latînî_) _et populus Rômânus . . .
    aedificârent_. Cf. lines 23, 24.
    21.6: #Quô factô# = _postquam hôc_ (i.e. the building of the
    temple) _factum est_.
    21.7: Cf. p. 18, n. 17.
    21.8: Sc. _esse_. For the personal construction #dîcitur#, see
    H 611, 1 (534, I and N. 1): M 962: A 330, _b_, 1: G 528, 1: B 332.
    21.9: Subjunctive, because in a subordinate clause of indir. disc.
    For the tense, cf. p. 6, n. 1.
    21.10: '_The_ (aforesaid) Latin,' mentioned in l. 28. This is one
    of the cases where Latin suffers from the lack of the definite
    article.
    21.11: 'cunningly.' Cf. p. 4, n. 4.
    21.12: The Tiber ran close to the foot of the Aventine hill on
    which (l. 26) the temple of Diana stood.
    21.13: = _cum habêret_, 'since he had.' #cum . . . vidêret# is
    also causal.
    21.14: abl. of quality: H 473, 2 (419, II): M 643: A 251: G 400:
    B 224.
    21.15: #ferôcem . . . ferôcî#: note that the order in the second
    of these two pairs of words is the reverse of that in the first.
    Cf. l. 36, _alteram ferôcem, mîtem alteram_. This arrangement is
    called _Chiasmus_: H 666, 2 (562): M 1150: A 344, _f_, and N.:
    G 682, and R.: B 350, II, _c_).
    22.1: The daughter of Tullius.
    22.2: #advocâtô . . . coepit# = _senâtum advocâvit et . . .
    coepit_. Cf. p. 2, n. 8.
    22.3: #quâ rê . . . contendit#: 'while Servius, after he had heard
    of this action, was hastening,' etc. For the tense of #contendit#,
    see p. 3, n. 14.
    22.4: Sc. _Cûriae_.
    22.5: #dêcessisset . . . redîret#: 'had departed . . . and _was_
    returning.'
    22.6: #super ipsum corpus#: 'over the _very_ body'; #ipsum#
    emphasizes the wickedness of Tullia. Roman feeling usually
    required that the utmost respect be shown to the bodies of the
    dead.
    22.7: Used here as in VI, 27.]


#VIII. Tarquinius Superbus, Romanorum rex septimus et ultimus#
[[stripped text]]

534-510 B.C.

Tarquinius Superbus regnum sceleste occupavit. Tamen bello strenuus
Latinos Sabinosque domuit. Urbem Gabios in potestatem redegit fraude
Sexti filii. Is cum indigne ferret eam urbem a patre expugnari non
posse, ad Gabinos se contulit, patris saevitiam in se conquerens.
Benigne a Gabinis exceptus paulatim eorum benevolentiam consequitur,
fictis blanditiis ita eos adliciens, ut apud omnes plurimum posset, et
ad postremum dux belli eligeretur. Tum e suis unum ad patrem mittit
sciscitatum quidnam se facere vellet. Pater nuntio filii nihil
respondit, sed velut deliberabundus in hortum transiit ibique inambulans
sequente nuntio altissima papaverum capita baculo decussit. Nuntius,
fessus exspectando, rediit Gabios. Sextus, cognito silentio patris et
facto, intellexit quid vellet pater. Primores civitatis interemit
patrique urbem sine ulla dimicatione tradidit.

Postea rex Ardeam urbem obsidebat. Ibi cum in castris essent, Tarquinius
Collatinus, sorore regis natus, forte cenabat apud Sextum Tarquinium cum
iuvenibus regiis. Incidit de uxoribus mentio; cum suam unusquisque
laudaret, placuit experiri. Itaque citatis equis Romam avolant; regias
nurus in convivio et luxu deprehendunt. Pergunt inde Collatiam;
Lucretiam, Collatini uxorem, inter ancillas lanae deditam inveniunt. Ea
ergo ceteris praestare iudicatur. Paucis interiectis diebus Sextus
Collatiam rediit et Lucretiae vim attulit. Illa postero die,
advocatispatre et coniuge, rem exposuit et se cultro, quem sub veste
abditum habebat, occidit. Conclamat vir paterque et in exitium regum
coniurant. Tarquinio Romam redeunti clausae sunt urbis portae et
exsilium indictum.

In antiquis annalibus memoriae haec sunt prodita. Anus hospita atque
incognita ad Tarquinium quondam Superbum regem adiit, novem libros
ferens, quos esse dicebat divina oracula: eos se velle venumdare.
Tarquinius pretium percontatus est: mulier nimium atque immensum
poposcit. Rex, quasi anus aetate desiperet, derisit. Tum illa foculum
cum igni apponit et tres libros ex novem deurit; et, ecquid reliquos sex
eodem pretio emere vellet, regem interrogavit. Sed Tarquinius id multo
risit magis, dixitque anum iam procul dubio delirare. Mulier ibidem
statim tres alios libros exussit; atque id ipsum denuo placide rogat, ut
tres reliquos eodem illo pretio emat. Tarquinius ore iam serio atque
attentiore animo fit; eam constantiam confidentiamque non neglegendam
intellegit: libros tres reliquos mercatur nihilo minore pretio quam quod
erat petitum pro omnibus. Sed eam mulierem tunc a Tarquinio digressam
postea nusquam loci visam constitit. Libri tres in sacrario conditi
Sibyllinique appellati. Ad eos, quasi ad oraculum, Quindecemviri adeunt,
cum dii immortales publice consulendi sunt.


  #VIII. Tarquinius Superbus, Rômânôrum rêx septimus et ûltimus#
  [[as printed]]

  534-510 B.C.

  Tarquinius Superbus rêgnum scelestê[8] occupâvit.[9] Tamen bellô
  strênuus Latînôs Sabînôsque domuit. Urbem Gabiôs in potestâtem
  redêgit fraude Sextî fîliî. Is cum indîgnê ferret eam urbem
  â patre expûgnârî nôn posse,[10] ad Gabînôs sê contulit, patris
      saevitiam
  in sê conquerêns. Benîgnê â Gabînîs exceptus paulâtim              {5}
  eôrum benevolentiam cônsequitur, fîctîs blanditiîs ita eôs adliciêns,
    [[23]]
  ut apud omnês plûrimum posset,[1] et ad postrêmum dux bellî
  êligerêtur. Tum ê suîs ûnum ad patrem mittit scîscitâtum[2]
  quidnam sê[3] facere vellet. Pater nûntiô fîliî nihil respondit, sed
  velut dêlîberâbundus[4] in hortum trânsiit ibique inambulâns      {10}
  sequente nûntiô altissima[5] papâverum capita baculô dêcussit.
  Nûntius, fessus exspectandô, rediit Gabiôs. Sextus, côgnitô
  silentiô patris et factô,[6] intellêxit[7] quid vellet pater.
  Prîmôrês cîvitâtis interêmit patrîque urbem sine ûllâ dîmicâtiône
  trâdidit.                                                         {15}

  Posteâ rêx Ardeam urbem obsidêbat. Ibi cum in castrîs essent,
  Tarquinius Collâtînus, sorôre[8] rêgis nâtus, forte cênâbat apud
  Sextum Tarquinium cum iuvenibus[9] rêgiîs. Incidit[10] dê uxôribus
  mentiô; cum suam ûnusquisque laudâret, placuit experîrî.
  Itaque citâtîs[11] equîs Rômam âvolant; rêgiâs[12] nurûs in
      convîviô[13]                                                  {20}
  et lûxû dêprehendunt. Pergunt inde Collâtiam[14]; Lucrêtiam,
  Collâtînî uxôrem, inter ancillâs lânae[15] dêditam inveniunt. Ea
  ergô cêterîs praestâre iûdicâtur. Paucîs interiectîs diêbus Sextus
  Collâtiam rediit et Lucrêtiae vim[16] attulit. Illa posterô diê,
      advocâtîs
  patre et coniuge, rem exposuit et sê cultrô, quem sub veste       {25}
    [[24]]
  abditum habêbat, occîdit. Conclâmat vir paterque et in[1] exitium
  rêgum coniûrant. Tarquiniô[2] Rômam redeuntî clausae sunt
  urbis portae et exsilium indictum.[3]

  In antîquîs annâlibus memoriae haec sunt prôdita.[4] Anus
  hospita atque incôgnita ad Tarquinium quondam Superbum rêgem      {30}
  adiit,[5] novem librôs ferêns, quôs esse dîcêbat dîvîna ôrâcula: eôs
  sê velle[6] vênumdare. Tarquinius pretium percontâtus est: mulier
  nimium atque immênsum popôscit. Rêx, quasi[7] anus aetâte dêsiperet,
  dêrîsit.[8] Tum illa foculum cum îgnî appônit et três librôs
  ex novem deûrit; et, ecquid reliquôs sex eôdem pretiô[9] emere    {35}
  vellet, rêgem interrogâvit. Sed Tarquinius id multô rîsit magis,
  dîxitque anum iam procul dubiô dêlîrâre. Mulier ibîdem statim
  três aliôs librôs exûssit[10]; atque id[11] ipsum dênuô placidê rogat,
  ut[12] três reliquôs eôdem illô pretiô emat. Tarquinius ôre[13] iam
  sêriô atque attentiôre animô[13] fit; eam[14] cônstantiam
      cônfîdentiamque                                               {40}
  nôn neglegendam[15] intellegit: librôs três reliquôs mercâtur
  nihilô minôre pretiô[9] quam quod erat petîtum prô omnibus. Sed
  eam mulierem tunc â Tarquiniô dîgressam[16] posteâ nûsquam locî
  vîsam[15] cônstitit. Librî[17] três in sacrâriô conditî Sibyllînîque
  appellâtî. Ad eôs, quasi ad ôrâculum, Quîndecemvirî adeunt, cum   {45}
  diî immortâlês pûblicê cônsulendî sunt.

    [Footnotes: VIII (pages 22-24)

    22.8: Cf. the whole description VII, 40-53.
    22.9: not 'occupied.'
    22.10: The infinitive depends on #indîgnê ferret#, an expression
    of emotion. Cf. p. 19, n. 6.
    23.1: #plûrimum posset#: 'he possessed great influence.'
    #plûrimum# is an accusative of extent.
    23.2: Cf. p. 5, n. 20.
    23.3: #sê# refers to Sextus. Sextus asked his father through the
    messenger: _Quidnam mê facere vîs?_
    23.4: Adjectives ending in -_bundus_ generally have the force of
    the English present participle active.
    23.5: #altissima . . . capita# = 'the heads of the tallest
    poppies.' How literally?
    23.6: #factô# is here a noun.
    23.7: It has been shown that the whole of this story was derived
    from Greek sources, and that the incident described in the text
    is, so far as Gabii is concerned, without foundation.
    23.8: H 469, 2 (415, II): M 609: A 244: G 395: B 215.
    23.9: #iuvenibus rêgiîs#: 'the princes.'
    23.10: #Incidit . . . mentiô#: 'the conversation happened to turn
    on (the merits of) their (respective) wives.' How literally?
    23.11: #citâtîs equîs#: 'at top speed.' How literally?
    23.12: #rêgiâs nurûs#: 'the king's daughters-in-law,' i.e. the
    princes' wives.
    23.13: #convîviô et lûxû#: 'a banquet and luxury' = 'a luxurious
    banquet.'
    23.14: The home of Collatinus.
    23.15: #lânae dêditam#: 'wholly intent on spinning.' In the
    oldest times the Roman housewife made all the garments of the
    household. Hence a frequent laudatory inscription on the
    tombstones of Roman ladies is _lânam fêcit_. Macaulay had this
    feature of Roman life in mind when (_Horatius_, stanza LXX) he
    wrote:
        "When the goodwife's shuttle merrily
          Goes flashing through the loom."
    23.16: #vim attulit# (_adferô_): 'outraged.'
    24.1: #in exitium rêgum#: 'to kill the royal family (#rêgum#).'
    For #in exitium# cf. p. 14, n. 4.
    24.2: dat. of disadvantage. Translate: 'against T., on his return
    to Rome.'
    24.3: Sc. _est_.
    24.4: _prôdô_.
    24.5: _adeô_.
    24.6: infin. because dependent on _dîxit_ understood, to be
    supplied from #dîcêbat#.
    24.7: #quasi . . . dêsiperet#: 'thinking that the old woman's mind
    was failing through age.' See p. 3, n. 6.
    24.8: _dêrîdeô_.
    24.9: abl. of price: H 478 (422): M 652: A 252: G 404: B 225.
    24.10: _exûrô_.
    24.11: explained by the clause #ut . . . emat#.
    24.12: #ut . . . emat#: a substantive clause of purpose depending
    on #rogat#: H 565 (498, I): M 894: A 331: G 546: B 295, 4.
    24.13: abl. of quality with #fit#.
    24.14: = _tâlem_, as often.
    24.15: sc. _esse_.
    24.16: #dîgressam# (_dîgredior_) = _postquam dîgressa est_.
    24.17: #Librî . . . appellâtî#: the _Sibyllae_ were inspired
    maidens devoted to the worship of Apollo. The most famous, from
    whom Tarquin was believed to have received the Sibylline books,
    lived at Cumae, on the coast of Campania, in Italy. The books were
    placed in a vault beneath the temple of Jupiter Capitolinus. When
    this temple was burned in 83 B.C., the senate sent envoys to
    Greece to make a new collection of oracular sayings. These also
    were deposited for a time in the temple of Jupiter after its
    restoration.]


#IX. Iunius Brutus, Romanorum consul primus# [[stripped text]]

Iunius Brutus, sorore Tarquinii Superbi natus, cum eandem fortunam
timeret, in quam frater inciderat, qui ob divitias et prudentiam ab
avunculo erat occisus, stultitiam finxit, unde Brutus dictus est.
Profectus Delphos cum Tarquinii filiis, quos pater ad Apollinem
muneribus honorandum miserat, baculo sambuceo aurum inclusum dono tulit
deo. Peractis deinde mandatis patris, iuvenes Apollinem consulunt
quisnam ex ipsis Romae regnaturus esset. Responsum est eum Romae summam
potestatem habiturum, qui primus matrem osculatus esset. Tunc Brutus,
velut si casu prolapsus cecidisset, terram osculatus est, scilicet quod
ea communis mater omnium mortalium esset.

Expulsis regibus duo consules creati sunt, Iunius Brutus et Tarquinius
Collatinus Lucretiae maritus. At libertas modo parta per dolum et
proditionem paene amissa est. Erant in iuventute Romana adulescentes
aliquot, sodales adulescentium Tarquiniorum. Hi cum legatis, quos rex ad
bona sua repetenda Romam miserat, de restituendis regibus conloquuntur,
ipsos Bruti consulis filios in societatem consilii adsumunt. Sermonem
eorum ex servis unus excepit; rem ad consules detulit. Datae ad
Tarquinium litterae manifestum facinus fecerunt. Proditores in vincula
coniecti sunt, deinde damnati. Stabant ad palum deligati iuvenes
nobilissimi; sed a ceteris liberi consulis omnium in se oculos
avertebant. Consules in sedem processere suam, missique lictores nudatos
virgis caedunt securique feriunt. Supplicii non spectator modo, sed et
exactor erat Brutus, qui tunc patrem exuit, ut consulem ageret.

Tarquinius deinde bello aperto regnum reciperare conatus est. Equitibus
praeerat Aruns, Tarquinii filius: rex ipse cum legionibus sequebatur.
Obviam hosti consules eunt; Brutus ad explorandum cum equitatu
antecessit. Aruns, ubi procul Brutum agnovit, inflammatus ira "Ille est
vir" inquit "qui nos patria expulit; ipse en ille nostris decoratus
insignibus magnifice incedit." Tum concitat calcaribus equum atque in
ipsum consulem dirigit; Brutus avide se certamini offert. Adeo infestis
animis concurrerunt, ut ambo hasta transfixi caderent; fugatus tamen
proelio est Tarquinius. Alter consul Romam triumphans rediit. Bruti
conlegae funus, quanto potuit apparatu, fecit. Brutum matronae, ut
parentem, annum luxerunt.


    [[25]]

  #IX. Iûnius Brûtus, Rômânôrum cônsul prîmus# [[as printed]]

  Iûnius Brûtus, sorôre[1] Tarquiniî Superbî nâtus, cum[2] eandem
  fortûnam timêret, in quam frâter inciderat, quî ob dîvitiâs et
  prûdentiam ab avunculô erat occîsus, stultitiam finxit, unde
  Brûtus dictus est. Profectus[3] Delphôs[4] cum Tarquiniî fîliîs,
  quôs pater ad Apollinem mûneribus honôrandum mîserat, baculô[5]    {5}
  sambûceô aurum inclûsum dônô[6] tulit deô. Perâctîs deinde
  mandâtîs patris, iuvenês Apollinem cônsulunt quisnam ex ipsîs
  Rômae[7] rêgnâtûrus esset.[8] Respônsum est eum Rômae[7] summam
  potestâtem habitûrum, quî prîmus mâtrem ôsculâtus esset.[9] Tunc
  Brûtus, velut sî câsû prôlâpsus[10] cecidisset, terram ôsculâtus est,
  scîlicet quod ea commûnis mâter omnium mortâlium esset.           {11}

  [Sidenote: B.C. 509.]

  Expulsîs rêgibus duo cônsulês[11] creâtî sunt, Iûnius Brûtus et
  Tarquinius Collâtînus[12] Lucrêtiae marîtus. At lîbertâs
  modo parta[13] per dolum et prôditiônem paene âmissa est.
  Erant in iuventûte Rômânâ adulêscentês aliquot, sodâlês           {15}
  adulêscentium Tarquiniôrum.[14] Hî cum lêgâtîs, quôs rêx ad bona sua
  repetenda Rômam mîserat, dê restituendîs rêgibus conloquuntur,
  ipsôs Brûtî cônsulis fîliôs in societâtem cônsiliî adsûmunt. Sermônem
  eôrum ex servîs ûnus excêpit; rem ad cônsulês dêtulit.
  Datae[15] ad Tarquinium lîtterae manifêstum facinus fêcêrunt.     {20}
  Prôditôrês in vincula coniectî sunt, deinde damnâtî. Stâbant ad
  pâlum dêligâtî iuvenês nôbilissimî; sed â cêterîs lîberî cônsulis
  omnium in sê oculôs âvertêbant. Cônsulês in sêdem prôcessêre[16]
    [[26]]
  suam, missîque lîctôrês nûdâtôs[1] virgîs caedunt secûrîque feriunt.
  Suppliciî nôn spectâtor modo, sed et[2] exâctor erat Brûtus,      {25}
  quî tunc patrem exuit, ut cônsulem ageret.[3]

    [Illustration {BRVTVS}]

  Tarquinius deinde bellô apertô rêgnum reciperâre cônâtus[4] est.
  Equitibus praeerat Ârûns, Tarquiniî fîlius: rêx ipse cum legiônibus
  sequêbâtur. Obviam hostî[5] cônsulês
  eunt; Brûtus ad explôrandum cum equitâtû                          {30}
  antecessit. Ârûns, ubi procul Brûtum
  âgnôvit,[6] înflammâtus îrâ "Ille est vir" inquit
  "quî nôs patriâ expulit; ipse[7] ên ille nostrîs
  decorâtus însîgnibus mâgnificê incêdit." Tum
  concitat calcâribus equum atque in ipsum cônsulem                 {35}
  dîrigit; Brûtus avidê sê certâminî offert. Adeô[8] înfêstîs
  animîs concurrêrunt, ut ambô hastâ trânsfîxî caderent; fugâtus
  tamen proeliô est Tarquinius. Alter[9] cônsul Rômam triumphâns
  rediit. Brûtî conlêgae fûnus, quantô[10] potuit apparâtû, fêcit.
  Brûtum mâtrônae, ut parentem, annum lûxêrunt.[11]                 {40}

    [Footnotes: IX (pages 25-26)

    25.1: Cf. p. 23, n. 8.
    25.2: #cum#: causal; cf. p. 4, n. 12; also p. xx, H 2.
    25.3: _proficîscor_.
    25.4: Cf. p. 3, n. 4.
    25.5: Join with #inclûsum#, and cf. p. 2, n. 7.
    25.6: dat. of purpose or service: H 433 (390): M 548: A 233, _a_:
    G 356: B 191, 2. This dat. is specially common in connection with
    another dat., as #deô# here (dat. of advantage).
    25.7: locative: H 483 (425, II): M 620: A 258, _c_, 2: G 411:
    B 228, 1.
    25.8: Cf. p. 3, n. 2. The whole clause is the object of
    #cônsulunt#, 'consult (by asking).'
    25.9: Cf. p. 6, n. 1. The oracle said: _Is . . . habêbit, quî
    . . . erit_.
    25.10: #prôlâpsus# (_prôlâbor_) #cecidisset# (_cadô_) = _prôlâpsus
    esset et cecidisset_.
    25.11: See Vocab., _cônsul_.
    25.12: Cf. VIII, 17.
    25.13: _pariô_.
    25.14: The sons of Tarquin, mentioned above, l. 4.
    25.15: = _quae datae erant_. _datae_ = _missae_, and so is
    construed with _ad_ and the accusative.
    25.16: = _prôcessêrunt._
    26.1: #nûdâtôs virgîs caedunt# = _nûdant (eôs) et virgîs caedunt_.
    26.2: = _etiam._
    26.3: What does the subjunctive express?
    26.4: _cônor_.
    26.5: dat. after _ob_ in #obviam#. The rule regarding compound
    verbs (p. 2, n. 7) holds true often of nouns, adjectives, and
    adverbs.
    26.6: _âgnôscô_.
    26.7: #ipse . . . incêdit#: the _spirit_ of this dramatic sentence
    may be reproduced thus: 'Look at him (#ên ille#)! He is actually
    adorned with _our_ insignia! See in what a lordly way he
    advances!'
    26.8: #Adeô#, 'such,' in part qualifies #înfêstîs#, in part paves
    the way for the result clause #ut . . . caderent#.
    26.9: #Alter#: 'the remaining.' Why may it be so translated?
    26.10: #quantô . . . apparâtû#: 'with the greatest possible
    splendor.'
    26.11: _lûgeô._]


#X. Mucius Scaevola# [[stripped text]]

Cum Porsena Romam obsideret, Mucius, vir Romanae constantiae, senatum
adiit et veniam transfugiendi petiit, necem regis repromittens. Accepta
potestate cum in castra Porsenae venisset, ibi in confertissima turba
prope tribunal constitit. Stipendium tunc forte militibus dabatur et
scriba cum rege pari fere ornatu sedebat. Mucius, ignorans uter rex
esset, illum pro rege occidit. Apprehensus et ad regem pertractus
dextram accenso ad sacrificium foculo iniecit, velut manum puniens, quod
in caede peccasset. Attonitus miraculo rex iuvenem amoveri ab altaribus
iussit. Tum Mucius, quasi beneficium remunerans, ait trecentos adversus
eum sui similes coniurasse. Qua re ille territus bellum acceptis
obsidibus deposuit. Mucio prata trans Tiberim data, ab eo Mucia
appellata. Statua quoque ei honoris gratia constituta est.


  #X. Mûcius Scaevola# [[as printed]]

  [Sidenote: B.C. 507]

  Cum Porsena[12] Rômam obsidêret, Mûcius, vir Rômânae[13]
  cônstantiae, senâtum adiit et veniam[14] trânsfugiendî petiit, necem
    [[27]]
  rêgis reprômittêns. Acceptâ[1] potestâte cum in castra Porsenae
  vênisset, ibi in cônfertissimâ turbâ prope tribûnal cônstitit.
  Stîpendium tunc forte[2] mîlitibus dabâtur et scrîba cum           {5}
  rêge parî[3] ferê ôrnâtû sedêbat. Mûcius, îgnôrâns uter rêx esset,
  illum prô rêge occîdit. Apprehênsus et ad rêgem pertrâctus[4]
  dextram accênsô[5] ad sacrificium foculô iniêcit, velut manum
  pûniêns, quod[6] in caede peccâsset. Attonitus mîrâculô rêx        {9}
  iuvenem âmovêrî ab altâribus iussit. Tum Mûcius, quasi beneficium
  remûnerâns, ait trecentôs adversus eum[7] suî similês coniûrâsse.
  Quâ rê ille territus[8] bellum acceptîs obsidibus dêposuit.[9]
  Mûciô prâta trâns Tiberim data,[10] ab eô Mûcia appellâta. Statua
  quoque eî[11] honôris grâtiâ cônstitûta est.                      {14}

    [Footnotes: X (pages 26-27)

    26.12: Tarquinius Superbus had applied to Porsena, king of the
    Etruscan city of Clusium, for aid in the recovery of his throne.
    Porsena gathered a large army and marched against Rome. For this
    story, see Macaulay's _Lays of Ancient Rome, Horatius_. Modern
    authorities on Roman history maintain that Porsena was so
    successful in his operations that he compelled the Romans to
    submit to a very humiliating treaty.
    26.13: We would say, 'truly Roman.'
    26.14: #veniam trânsfugiendî#: 'permission to go over (to the
    enemy).'
    27.1: #Acceptâ# (_accipiô_) #. . . vênisset# = _Cum potestâtem
    accêpisset et . . . vênisset_.
    27.2: Cf. p. 5, n. 19.
    27.3: #parî . . . ôrnâtû#: abl. abs. to denote an attendant
    circumstance: H 489, 1 (431, 1): M 640: A 255, _d_, 5: G 409, N.:
    B 227.
    27.4: _pertrahô_.
    27.5: _accendô_.
    27.6: #quod . . . peccâsset# expresses Scaevola's thought: see
    H 588, II (516, II): M 851: A 321: G 541: B 286, 1, and cf. p. 14,
    n. 1, and p. xxi, H 4.
    27.7: #eum# refers to the king, #suî# to Scaevola. Scaevola's
    speech was: _Trecentî adversus tê meî similês coniûrâvêrunt._
    27.8: _terreô_.
    27.9: _dêpônô_.
    27.10: Sc. _sunt_.
    27.11: dat. of advantage with #cônstitûta est#.]


#XI. Fabii trecenti sex# [[stripped text]]

479-477 B.C.

Cum adsiduis Veientium incursionibus vexarentur Romani, Fabia gens
senatum adit; consul Fabius pro gente loquitur: "Vos alia bella curate;
Fabios hostes Veientibus date: id bellum privato sumptu gerere nobis in
animo est." Gratiae ei ingentes actae sunt. Consul e Curia egressus,
comitante Fabiorum agmine, domum rediit. Manat tota urbe rumor; Fabium
ad caelum laudibus ferunt. Fabii postero die arma capiunt. Numquam
exercitus neque minor numero neque clarior fama et admiratione hominum
per urbem incessit. Ibant sex et trecenti milites, omnes patricii, omnes
unius gentis. Ad Cremeram flumen perveniunt. Is opportunus visus est
locus communiendo praesidio. Hostes non semel fusi pacem supplices
petunt.

Veientes pacis impetratae cum brevi paenituisset, redintegrato bello
inierunt consilium insidiis ferocem hostem captandi. Multo successu
Fabiis audacia crescebat. Cum igitur palati passim agros popularentur,
pecora a Veientibus obviam acta sunt; ad quae progressi Fabii in
insidias delapsi omnes ad unum perierunt. Dies, quo id factum est, inter
nefastos relatus est; porta, qua profecti erant, Scelerata est
appellata. Unus omnino superfuit ex ea gente, qui propter aetatem
impuberem domi relictus erat. Is genus propagavit ad Quintum Fabium
Maximum, qui Hannibalem mora fregit.


  #XI. Fabiî trecentî sex# [[as printed]]

  479-477 B.C.

  Cum[12] adsiduîs Vêientium[13] incursiônibus vexârentur[12] Rômânî,
  Fabia gêns senâtum adit; cônsul Fabius prô gente loquitur:
  "Vôs alia bella cûrâte; Fabiôs[14] hostês Vêientibus date: id
  bellum prîvâtô sûmptû[15] gerere nôbîs[16] in animô est." Grâtiae eî
    [[28]]
  ingentês âctae sunt. Cônsul ê Cûriâ êgressus, comitante[1]         {5}
  Fabiôrum âgmine, domum rediit. Mânat tôtâ urbe rûmor; Fabium
  ad[2] caelum laudibus ferunt. Fabiî posterô diê arma capiunt.
  Numquam[3] exercitus neque minor numerô neque clârior fâmâ et
  admîrâtiône hominum per urbem incessit. Îbant sex et trecentî
  mîlitês, omnês patriciî, omnês ûnîus gentis. Ad Cremeram flûmen   {10}
  perveniunt. Is opportûnus vîsus est locus commûniendô praesidiô.[4]
  Hostês nôn[5] semel fûsî pâcem supplicês[6] petunt.

  Vêientês[7] pâcis impetrâtae cum brevî paenituisset,[8] redintegrâtô
  bellô iniêrunt cônsilium însidiîs ferôcem hostem captandî.
  Multô successû Fabiîs[9] audâcia crêscêbat. Cum igitur pâlâtî     {15}
  passim agrôs populârentur, pecora â Vêientibus obviam[10] âcta
  sunt; ad quae prôgressî Fabiî in însidiâs dêlâpsî[11] omnês ad
  ûnum periêrunt. Diês, quô id factum est, inter nefâstôs relâtus[12]
  est; porta, quâ profectî erant, Scelerâta est appellâta. Ûnus
  omnînô superfuit ex eâ gente, quî propter aetâtem impûberem       {20}
  domî[13] relîctus[14] erat. Is[15] genus propâgâvit ad Quîntum[16]
      Fabium
  Mâximum, quî Hannibalem morâ[17] frêgit.[18]

    [Footnotes: XI (pages 27-28)

    27.12: The subjunctive expresses both time and cause: cf. p. 2,
    n. 13, and p. xxii, J.
    27.13: The Veientes fought almost constantly against Rome from a
    very early time (cf. IV, 57; Livy says that they were defeated by
    Romulus) till their city was completely destroyed in 396 B.C.
    27.14: #Fabiôs . . . date#: 'give the Veientes the Fabii as their
    enemies,' i.e. let the war against the Veientes be the special
    business of the Fabii.
    27.15: Cf. p. 24, n. 9.
    27.16: #nôbîs . . . est#: since #nôbîs# is a dat. of possession
    (H 430 (387): M 542: A 231: G 349: B 190) with #est#, the phrase
    exactly = 'we have it in mind.' The subject of #est# is the clause
    #id . . . gerere#. #Fabiôs# is strongly opposed to #vôs#.
    28.1: #comitante . . . âgmine#: 'the Fabii accompanying him in a
    body.' How literally?
    28.2: #ad . . . ferunt#: so we 'laud a person to the skies.'
    28.3: #Numquam . . . neque . . . neque#: in Latin, as in English,
    two negatives neutralize each other and make an affirmative. To
    this law there are two regular exceptions in Latin: When a general
    negative like _nôn_, _numquam_, or _nêmô_ is followed (1) by
    _neque . . . neque_ or (2) by the emphatic _nê . . . quidem_. In
    the former case the negation is distributed by the _neque . . .
    neque_ into two (or more) clauses or phrases; in the latter, the
    full weight of the negation is concentrated upon a single word or
    phrase. In English a single negative is always to be employed.
    28.4: dat. of purpose: cf. p. 25, n. 6. This construction is
    especially frequent with phrases consisting of a gerundive and a
    noun.
    28.5: #nôn semel#: 'not once (only),' i.e. repeatedly.
    28.6: Cf. p. 4, n. 4.
    28.7: #Vêientês . . . paenituisset#: lit., 'when it had repented
    the V. of the peace which they had secured.' What is our idiom?
    #paenituisset# is wholly impersonal; #Vêientês# is acc., though
    logically its subject, and #pâcis# is gen., though logically its
    object. H 457 (409, III): M 585: A 221, _b_: G 377: B 209.
    28.8: See p. 2, n. 13.
    28.9: dat. of reference: H 425, 4, N. (384, 4, N. 2): M 537:
    A 235, _a_: G 346: B 187, II.
    28.10: Sc. _eîs_: 'to meet them.'
    28.11: _dêlâbor_.
    28.12: _refero_.
    28.13: locative: H 484, 2 (426, 2): M 622: A 258, _d_: G 411, R.
    2: B 232, 2.
    28.14: _relinquô_.
    28.15: #Is . . . Mâximum#: freely 'he saved the family from
    extinction and became the ancestor of Maximus.'
    28.16: See Selection XIX.
    28.17: Fabius, by his 'policy of masterly inactivity,' gained the
    title of _Cunctâtor_, 'the Delayer.'
    28.18: _frangô_.]


#XII. Lucius Virginius# [[stripped text]]

Anno trecentesimo ab urbe condita pro duobus consulibus decemviri creati
sunt, qui adlatas e Graecia leges populo proponerent. Duodecim tabulis
eae sunt perscriptae. Ceterum decemviri sua ipsorum insolentia in
exitium acti sunt. Nam unus ex iis Appius Claudius virginem plebeiam
adamavit. Quam cum Appius non posset pretio ac spe perlicere, unum e
clientibus subornavit, qui eam in servitutem deposceret, facile victurum
se sperans, cum ipse esset et accusator et iudex. Lucius Virginius,
puellae pater, tunc aberat militiae causa. Cliens igitur virgini
venienti in Forum (namque ibi in tabernis litterarum ludi erant) iniecit
manum, adfirmans suam esse servam. Eam sequi se iubet; ni faciat,
minatur se vi abstracturum. Pavida puella stupente, ad clamorem nutricis
fit concursus. Itaque cum ille puellam vi non posset abducere, eam vocat
in ius, ipso Appio iudice.

Interea missi nuntii ad Virginium properant. Is commeatu sumpto a
castris profectus prima luce Romam advenit, cum iam civitas in Foro
exspectatione erecta stabat. Virginius statim in Forum lacrimabundus et
civium opem implorans filiam suam deducit. Neque eo setius Appius, cum
in tribunal escendisset, Virginiam clienti suo addixit. Tum pater, ubi
nihil usquam auxilii vidit, "Quaeso," inquit "Appi, ignosce patrio
dolori; sine me filiam ultimum adloqui." Data venia pater cum filiam
seduxisset, ab lanio cultro adrepto pectus puellae transfigit. Tum vero
sibi viam facit et respersus cruore ad exercitum profugit et milites ad
vindicandum facinus accendit. Concitatus exercitus montem Aventinum
insedit; decem tribunos militum creavit; decemviros magistratu se
abdicare coegit eosque omnes aut morte aut exilio multavit; ipse Appius
Claudius in carcerem coniectus mortem sibi conscivit.


    [[29]]

  #XII. Lûcius Virgînius# [[as printed]]

  Annô trecentêsimô[1] ab urbe[2] conditâ prô duôbus cônsulibus
  decemvirî creâtî sunt, quî[3] adlâtâs ê Graeciâ lêgês populô
  prôpônerent.[4] Duodecim[5] tabulîs[6] eae sunt perscrîptae. Cêterum
  decemvirî[7] suâ[8] ipsôrum însolentiâ in exitium âctî sunt. Nam
  ûnus ex iîs Appius Claudius virginem plêbêiam adamâvit. Quam[9]    {5}
  cum Appius nôn posset pretiô ac spê perlicere, ûnum ê
  clientibus[10] subôrnâvit, quî eam in[11] servitûtem dêpôsceret,[12]
      facile
  victûrum[13] sê spêrâns, cum ipse esset et accûsâtor et iûdex. Lûcius
  Virgînius, puellae pater, tunc aberat mîlitiae causâ. Cliêns igitur
  virginî[14] venientî in Forum (namque ibi in tabernîs litterârum[15]
  lûdî erant) iniêcit manum, adfîrmâns suam esse servam. Eam        {11}
  sequî sê iubet; nî faciat,[16] minâtur sê vî abstrâctûrum. Pavidâ
  puellâ[17] stupente,[17] ad clâmôrem nûtrîcis fit concursus. Itaque
      cum
  ille puellam vî nôn posset abdûcere, eam vocat in iûs, ipsô
  Appiô[17] iûdice.[17]                                             {15}

  [Sidenote: B.C. 449.]

  Intereâ missî nûntiî ad Virgînium properant. Is commeâtû
  sûmptô â castrîs profectus prîmâ lûce Rômam advênit, cum iam
  cîvitâs in Forô exspectâtiône êrêcta stâbat. Virgînius statim in
  Forum lacrimâbundus et cîvium opem implôrâns fîliam suam
    [[30]]
  dêdûcit. Neque[1] eô sêtius Appius, cum in tribûnal êscendisset,  {20}
  Virgîniam clientî suô addîxit. Tum pater, ubi nihil ûsquam
  auxiliî[2] vîdit, "Quaesô," inquit "Appî, îgnôsce patriô dolôrî[3];
  sine mê fîliam ultimum adloquî." Datâ veniâ pater cum fîliam
  sêdûxisset, ab laniô cultrô[4] adreptô pectus puellae trânsfîgit.
  Tum vêrô sibi viam facit et respersus cruôre ad exercitum profugit
  et mîlitês ad vindicandum facinus accendit. Concitâtus            {26}
  exercitus montem Aventînum însêdit; decem tribûnôs[5] mîlitum
  creâvit; decemvirôs magistrâtû sê abdicâre coêgit[6] eôsque omnês
  aut morte aut exiliô multâvit; ipse Appius Claudius in carcerem
  coniectus mortem sibi cônscîvit.[7]                               {30}

    [Footnotes: XII (pages 29-30)

    29.1: The dating is not exact, as the Decemvirs were elected in
    451 B.C.
    29.2: Cf. p. 5, n. 15.
    29.3: #quî . . . prôpônerent#: i.e. after studying the laws of
    Greece, they were to draw up a code and submit it to the people.
    29.4: Cf. p. 5, n. 3.
    29.5: From this circumstance the code was known as the _Lêgês XII
    Tabulârum_.
    29.6: abl. of means; we say '_on_ tablets.' The tablets were of
    bronze. For many centuries Roman schoolboys had to commit these
    laws to memory.
    29.7: The Decemvirs had been elected for one year, at the end of
    which time they reported their work still unfinished, and a second
    board was chosen. The story that follows concerns the second
    board. All accounts agree that the rule of the first board was in
    all respects just.
    29.8: #suâ ipsôrum#: a strong expression for 'their own.'
    29.9: Cf. p. 4, n. 3.
    29.10: See Vocab., _cliêns_.
    29.11: #in servitûtem# expresses purpose (cf. p. 14, n. 4), and so
    = _ut serva esset_.
    29.12: Cf. p. 5, n. 3.
    29.13: _vincô_.
    29.14: Join with #iniêcit manum#, and cf. p. 2, n. 7.
    29.15: #litterârum lûdî#: schools where children were taught their
    A B C's, i.e. what we should call 'primary schools.'
    29.16: subjunctive as the subordinate clause of the indirect
    quotation, which depends on #minâtur#. The threat was: _Nî (id)
    fêceris, vî (tê) abstraham_.
    29.17: abl. abs.
    30.1: #Neque eô sêtius#: 'nevertheless.' How literally? #eô# =
    'for that reason.'
    30.2: partitive gen. with #nihil#: H 441 (397, 1): M 564: A 216,
    _a_, 3: G 369: B 201, 2.
    30.3: dat. with #îgnôsce#: H 426, 2 (385, II): M 531: A 227:
    G 346: B 187, II, _a_.
    30.4: #cultrô . . . trânsfîgit#: cf. p. 2, n. 8.
    30.5: #tribûnôs#: two armies were in the field against the Sabines
    and Aequians. The eight Decemvirs who commanded them were deposed,
    and ten tribunes, or 'captains,' were chosen in their place.
    30.6: _côgô_.
    30.7: _cônscîscô_. With this whole story cf. Macaulay's _Lays_,
    _Virginia_.]


#XIII. Titus Manlius Torquatus# [[stripped text]]

Titus Manlius ob ingenii et linguae tarditatem a patre rûs relegatus
erat. Qui cum audivisset patri diem dictam esse a Pomponio, tribuno
plebis, cepit consilium rudis quidem et agrestis animi, sed pietate
laudabile. Cultro succinctus mane in urbem atque a porta confestim ad
Pomponium pergit: introductus cultrum stringit et super lectum Pomponii
stans se eum transfixurum minatur, nisi ab incepta accusatione desistat.
Pavidus tribunus, quippe qui cerneret ferrum ante oculos micans,
accusationem dimisit. Ea res adulescenti eo maiori fuit honori quod
animum eius acerbitas paterna a pietate non avertisset, ideoque eodem
anno tribunus militum factus est.

Cum postea Galli ad tertium lapidem trans Anienem fluvium castra
posuissent, exercitus Romanus ab urbe profectus in citeriore ripa fluvii
constitit. Pons in medio erat: tunc Gallus eximia corporis magnitudine
in vacuum pontem processit et quam maxima voce potuit "Quem nunc" inquit
"Roma fortissimum habet, is procedat agedum ad pugnam, ut eventus
certaminis nostri ostendat utra gens bello sit melior." Diu inter
primores iuvenum Romanorum silentium fuit. Tum Titus Manlius ex statione
ad imperatorem pergit: "Iniussu tuo," inquit, "imperator, extra ordinem
numquam pugnaverim, non si certam victoriam videam; si tu permittis,
volo ego illi beluae ostendere me ex ea familia ortum esse, quae
Gallorum agmen ex rupe Tarpeia deiecit." Cui imperator "Macte virtute,"
inquit "Tite Manli, esto: perge et nomen Romanum invictum praesta."

Armant deinde iuvenem aequales: scutum capit, Hispano cingitur gladio,
ad propiorem pugnam habili. Exspectabat eum Gallus stolide laetus et
linguam ab inrisu exserens. Ubi constitere inter duas acies, Gallus
ensem cum ingenti sonitu in arma Manlii deiecit. Manlius vero inter
corpus et arma Galli sese insinuans uno alteroque ictu ventrem
transfodit et in spatium ingens ruentem porrexit hostem; iacenti torquem
detraxit, quem cruore respersum collo circumdedit suo. Defixerat pavor
cum admiratione Gallos; Romani alacres obviam militi suo progrediuntur
et gratulantes laudantesque ad imperatorem perducunt. Manlius inde
Torquati cognomen accepit.

Idem Manlius, postea consul factus bello Latino, ut disciplinam
militarem restitueret, edixit ne quis extra ordinem in hostes pugnaret.
T. Manlius, consulis filius, cum propius forte ad stationem hostium
accessisset, is, qui Latino equitatui praeerat, ubi consulis filium
agnovit, "Visne" inquit "congredi mecum, ut singularis certaminis eventu
cernatur, quantum eques Latinus Romano praestet?" Movit ferocem animum
iuvenis seu ira seu detrectandi certaminis pudor. Itaque oblitus imperii
paterni in certamen ruit et Latinum ex equo excussum transfixit
spoliisque lectis in castra ad patrem venit. Extemplo filium aversatus
consul milites classico advocat. Qui postquam frequentes convenere,
"Quandoquidem" inquit "tu, fili, contra imperium consulis pugnasti,
oportet disciplinam, quam solvisti, poena tua restituas. Triste
exemplum, sed in posterum salubre iuventuti eris. I, lictor, deliga ad
palum." Metu omnes obstupuere; sed postquam cervice caesa fusus est
cruor, in questus et lamenta erupere. Manlio Romam redeunti seniores
tantum obviam exierunt: iuventus et tunc eum et omni deinde vita
exsecrata est.

Operae pretium erit aliud severitatis disciplinae Romanae exemplum
proferre, simul ut appareat quam facile severitas in crudelitatem et
furorem abeat. Cn. Piso fuit vir a multis vitiis integer, sed pravus et
cui placebat pro constantia rigor. Is cum iratus ad mortem duci
iussisset militem, quasi interfecisset commilitonem, cum quo egressus
erat e castris et sine quo redierat, roganti tempus aliquod ad
conquirendum non dedit. Damnatus miles extra castrorum vallum ductus est
et iam cervicem porrigebat, cum subito apparuit ille commilito, qui
occisus dicebatur. Tunc centurio supplicio praepositus condere gladium
carnificem iubet. Ambo commilitones alter alterum complexi ingenti
concursu et magno gaudio exercitus deducuntur ad Pisonem. Ille
conscendit tribunal furens et utrumque ad mortem duci iubet, adicit et
centurionem, qui damnatum militem reduxerat, haec praefatus: "Te morte
plecti iubeo, quia iam damnatus es; te, quia causa damnationis
commilitoni fuisti; te, quia iussus occidere militem imperatori non
paruisti."

Ceterum Manlianae gentis propriam fere fuisse illam in filios
acerbitatem alius Manlius, illius de quo supra diximus nepos, ostendit.
Cum Macedonum legati Romam venissent conquestum de Silano, Manlii
Torquati filio, quod praetor provinciam expilasset, pater, avitae
severitatis heres, petiit a patribus conscriptis ne quid de ea re
statuerent, antequam ipse inspexisset Macedonum et filii sui causam. Id
a senatu libenter concessum est viro summae dignitatis, consulari
iurisque civilis peritissimo. Itaque, instituta domi cognitione causae,
solus per totum biduum utramque partem audiebat ac tertio die
pronuntiavit filium suum videri non talem fuisse in provincia, quales
eius maiores fuissent, et in conspectum suum deinceps venire vetuit. Tam
tristi patris iudicio perculsus lucem ulterius intueri non sustinuit et
proxima nocte vitam suspendio finivit. Peregerat Torquatus severi et
religiosi iudicis partes, satisfactum erat rei publicae, habebat
ultionem Macedonia, at nondum erat inflexus patris rigor. Igitur ne
exsequiis quidem filii interfuit, ut patribus mos erat apud Romanos, et
eo ipso die, quo funus eius ducebatur, aures, ut solebat, volentibus
consulere se de iure praebuit.


  #XIII. Titus Mânlius Torquâtus# [[as printed]]

  Titus Mânlius ob ingeniî et linguae tarditâtem â patre rûs[8]
  relêgâtus erat. Quî cum audîvisset patrî[9] diem dictam esse â
  Pompôniô, tribûnô plêbis, cêpit cônsilium rudis quidem et agrestis
  animî,[10] sed pietâte laudâbile. Cultrô succinctus mâne in
  urbem atque â portâ cônfêstim ad[11] Pompônium pergit:             {5}
  intrôductus[12] cultrum stringit et super lectum Pompôniî stâns sê eum
  trânsfîxûrum minâtur, nisi ab inceptâ accûsâtiône dêsistat.[13]
      Pavidus
    [[31]]
  tribûnus, quîppe[1] quî cerneret ferrum ante oculôs micâns,
      accûsâtiônem
  dîmîsit. Ea rês adulêscentî[2] eô[3] mâiôrî[4] fuit honôrî
  quod animum êius acerbitâs paterna â pietâte nôn âvertisset,      {10}
  ideôque eôdem annô tribûnus mîlitum factus est.

    [Illustration: MÎLIÂRIUM]

  [Sidenote: B.C. 361.]

  Cum posteâ Gallî[5] ad tertium[6] lapidem trâns Aniênem fluvium
  castra posuissent, exercitus Rômânus ab urbe profectus in citeriôre
  rîpâ fluviî cônstitit. Pôns in mediô[7] erat: tunc Gallus
  eximiâ corporis mâgnitûdine in vacuum pontem                      {15}
  prôcessit et quam[8] mâximâ vôce potuit "Quem
  nunc" inquit "Rôma fortissimum habet, is prôcêdat[9]
  agedum ad pûgnam, ut êventus certâminis nostrî
  ostendat utra gêns bellô sit melior." Diû inter
  prîmôrês iuvenum Rômânôrum silentium fuit. Tum                    {20}
  Titus Mânlius ex statiône ad imperâtôrem pergit:
  "Iniussû[10] tuô," inquit, "imperâtor, extrâ ôrdinem
  numquam pûgnâverim,[11] nôn sî certam victôriam                   {23}
  videam[11]; sî tû permittis, volô ego illî bêluae ostendere mê ex eâ
  familiâ ortum esse, quae Gallôrum âgmen ex rûpe Tarpêiâ dêiêcit."[12]
    [[32]]
  Cuî imperâtor "Macte[1] virtûte," inquit "Tite Mânlî, estô: perge
  et nômen Rômânum invictum praestâ."                               {27}

  Armant deinde iuvenem aequâlês: scûtum capit, Hispânô[2]
  cingitur[3] gladiô, ad propiôrem[4] pûgnam habilî. Exspectâbat eum
  Gallus stolidê laetus et linguam ab inrîsû exserêns.              {30}
  Ubi cônstitêre[5] inter duâs aciês, Gallus ênsem cum
  ingentî sonitû in arma Mânliî dêiêcit. Mânlius vêrô
  inter corpus et arma Gallî sêsê însinuâns ûnô[6] alterôque
  îctû ventrem trânsfôdit et in spatium ingêns
  ruentem porrêxit hostem; iacentî[7] torquem dêtrâxit,             {35}
  quem cruôre respersum[8] collô[9] circumdedit[10] suô.
  Dêfîxerat pavor[11] cum admîrâtiône Gallôs; Rômânî
  alacrês obviam mîlitî suô prôgrediuntur et grâtulantês
  laudantêsque ad imperâtôrem perdûcunt. Mânlius
  inde Torquâtî côgnômen accêpit.                                   {40}

    [Illustration: GLADIUS]

  [Sidenote: B.C. 340.]

  Îdem Mânlius, posteâ cônsul factus bellô Latînô,
  ut dîsciplînam mîlitârem restitueret, êdîxit nê[12] quis
  extrâ ôrdinem in hostês pûgnâret. T. Mânlius,[13]
  cônsulis fîlius, cum propius forte ad statiônem hostium           {44}
  accessisset, is, quî Latînô equitâtuî praeerat, ubi cônsulis fîlium
  âgnôvit,[14] "Vîsne" inquit "congredî mêcum, ut singulâris certâminis
  êventû cernâtur, quantum eques Latînus Rômânô praestet?"
  Môvit ferôcem animum iuvenis seu îra seu dêtrêctandî[15]
    [[33]]
  certâminis pudor. Itaque oblîtus[1] imperiî[2] paternî in certâmen
  ruit et Latînum[3] ex equô excussum trânsfîxit spoliîsque lêctîs  {50}
  in castra ad patrem vênit. Extemplô fîlium âversâtus
  cônsul mîlitês classicô advocat. Quî postquam
  frequentês convênêre, "Quandôquidem" inquit "tû,
  fîlî, contrâ imperium cônsulis pûgnâstî, oportet[4]
  dîsciplînam, quam solvistî, poenâ[5] tuâ restituâs.               {55}
  Trîste exemplum, sed in[6] posterum salûbre iuventûtî
  eris. Î,[7] lîctor, dêligâ[8] ad pâlum." Metû omnês
  obstupuêre; sed postquam cervîce caesâ fûsus est cruor, in questûs
  et lâmenta êrûpêre.[9] Mânliô Rômam redeuntî seniôrês tantum
  obviam exiêrunt: iuventûs et tunc eum et omnî[10] deinde vîtâ     {60}
  exsecrâta est.

    [Illustration: LÎCTOR]

  Operae pretium erit aliud sevêritâtis dîsciplînae Rômânae
  exemplum prôferre, simul ut appâreat quam facile sevêritâs in[11]
  crûdêlitâtem et furôrem abeat. Cn. Pîsô fuit[12] vir â multîs vitiîs
  integer, sed prâvus et cuî[13] placêbat prô cônstantiâ rigor. Is  {65}
  cum îrâtus ad mortem dûcî iussisset mîlitem, quasi[14] interfêcisset
  commîlitônem, cum quô êgressus erat ê castrîs et sine quô redierat,
  rogantî[15] tempus aliquod ad conquîrendum[16] nôn dedit.
  Damnâtus mîles extrâ castrôrum vâllum ductus est et iam cervîcem
  porrigêbat, cum subitô appâruit ille commîlitô, quî occîsus[17]   {70}
    [[34]]
  dîcêbâtur. Tunc centuriô suppliciô praepositus condere gladium
  carnificem iubet. Ambô commîlitônês alter alterum complexî
  ingentî concursû et mâgnô gaudiô exercitûs dêdûcuntur ad Pîsônem.
  Ille cônscendit tribûnal furêns et utrumque ad mortem             {74}
  dûcî iubet, adicit et centuriônem, quî damnâtum mîlitem redûxerat,
  haec praefâtus[1]: "Tê morte plectî iubeô, quia iam damnâtus
  es; tê, quia causa damnâtiônis commîlitônî fuistî; tê, quia
  iussus occîdere mîlitem imperâtôrî[2] nôn pâruistî."

  Cêterum Mânliânae gentis[3] propriam ferê fuisse[4] illam in
  fîliôs acerbitâtem alius Mânlius, illîus dê quô suprâ dîximus     {80}
  nepôs, ostendit. Cum Macedonum lêgâtî Rômam vênissent
  conquestum[5] dê Sîlânô, Mânliî Torquâtî fîliô, quod praetor[6]
      prôvinciam
  expîlâsset,[7] pater, avîtae sevêritâtis hêrês, petiit â patribus[8]
  cônscrîptîs nê quid dê eâ rê statuerent, antequam ipse înspexisset
  Macedonum et fîliî suî causam. Id â senâtû libenter concessum     {85}
  est virô summae[9] dîgnitâtis, cônsulârî iûrisque cîvîlis perîtissimô.
  Itaque, înstitûtâ domî côgnitiône causae, sôlus per tôtum bîduum
  utramque partem audiêbat ac tertiô diê prônûntiâvit fîlium suum
  vidêrî nôn tâlem fuisse in prôvinciâ, quâlês êius mâiôrês fuissent,
  et in cônspectum suum deinceps venîre vetuit. Tam trîstî patris   {90}
  iûdiciô perculsus[10] lûcem[11] ulterius intuêrî nôn sustinuit et
  proximâ[12] nocte vîtam suspendiô fînîvit. Perêgerat[13] Torquâtus
      sevêrî
  et religiôsî iûdicis partês,[14] satisfactum erat reî pûblicae,
      habêbat
  ultiônem Macedonia, at nôndum erat înflexus patris rigor. Igitur  {94}
  nê[15] exsequiîs quidem fîliî interfuit, ut patribus môs erat apud
    [[35]]
  Rômânôs, et eô ipsô diê, quô fûnus êius dûcêbâtur, aurês, ut
  solêbat, volentibus cônsulere sê dê iûre praebuit.

    [Footnotes: XIII (pages 30-34)

    30.8: Cf. p. 3, n. 4.
    30.9: #patrî . . . esse#: 'that a day had been set against his
    father (for trial),' i.e. 'that his father had been summoned to
    appear for trial.' Among the charges against the elder Manlius was
    that of cruelty to his son. #patrî# is a dat. of disadvantage.
    30.10: #cêpit . . . laudâbile#: 'he formed a plan (which, though
    it gave token) of a rough and uncouth temper (was) nevertheless
    commendable by reason of the filial devotion (which it showed).'
    For #quidem . . . sed#, cf. p. 10, n. 10. #animî# is a genitive of
    quality or description with #cônsilium#.
    30.11: #ad Pompônium# = 'to (the house of) Pomponius.'
    30.12: = a temporal clause: 'when he had been ushered in.'
    30.13: For the mood, cf. p. 29, n. 16.
    31.1: #quîppe quî#: 'since indeed he,' etc. #quî# = _cum is_
    (cf. p. 4, n. 3), and the relative clause has its verb in the
    subjunctive because it expresses a reason: H 592, 1 (517, 3, 1)):
    M 840: A 320, _e_, N. 1: G 633: B 283, 3, _a_.
    31.2: dat. of advantage.
    31.3: #eô# = 'for this reason,' explained by #quod . . .
    âvertisset#.
    31.4: #mâiôrî fuit honôrî#: 'was all the more credit'; cf. p. 25,
    n. 6.
    31.5: In the fifth century B.C. the Gauls left their homes in
    northwestern Europe, and, crossing the Alps, gained control of the
    fertile valley of the Po. Hence that part of the Italian peninsula
    was called Gallia Cisalpina. Thence they made raids into the lands
    to the south.
    31.6: With #tertium# sc. _ab urbe Rômâ_. On all the roads leading
    from Rome milestones were set up to mark the distance from the
    gate in the Servian Wall (see map, p. xxviii), by which the road
    issued from the capital.
    31.7: Sc. _duôrum exercituum_, i.e. 'between the two armies.'
    31.8: #quam . . . potuit#: cf. p. 26, n. 10.
    31.9: subjunctive of exhortation or command: H 559, 1 (484, II):
    M 713: A 266: G 263, 3: B 274.
    31.10: #Iniussû tuô#: 'without your consent.'
    31.11: subjunctive in an ideal condition: H 576 (509): M 936:
    A 307, _b_: G 596: B 303.
    31.12: In 388 B.C. the Gauls had captured and destroyed all of
    Rome save the Capitol, which was commanded by M. Manlius, the
    father of Titus. He was aroused one night by the cackling of the
    sacred geese, to find that the Gauls had climbed by a secret path,
    and had almost effected an entrance. He awoke the garrison, hurled
    the foremost Gauls back upon their companions, and thus saved the
    Capitol.
    32.1: #macte virtûte . . . estô#: lit., 'be glorified in
    (respect of) your valor.' The phrase is in part an expression of
    commendation, like our 'bravo!' in part a prayer, like 'success
    attend thee!'
    32.2: A straight, two-edged sword, not more than two feet long,
    used for thrusting rather than for striking. The Gallic sword was
    long and without point.
    32.3: = _cingit sê_, i.e. 'girds himself,' not 'is girded.'
    32.4: 'nearer,' i.e. hand to hand.
    32.5: _cônsistô_. What tense?
    32.6: #ûnô alterôque îctû#: 'with one stroke after the other';
    i.e. he killed him with two quick blows.
    32.7: Sc. _eî_, and render 'from him as he lay (dead).' See p. 17,
    n. 4.
    32.8: _respergô_.
    32.9: What case?
    32.10: In its compounds, _dare_ more often = 'to put' than 'to
    give.'
    32.11: #pavor cum admîrâtiône# = _pavor et admîrâtiô_; cf. _mentês
    cum oculîs_, II, 12.
    32.12: #nê quis . . . pûgnâret#: 'that no one should fight.' For
    the subjunctive, see p. 9, n. 6.
    32.13: Subject of #accessisset#. For its position, see p. 19,
    n. 7.
    32.14: _âgnôscô_.
    32.15: #dêtrêctandî . . . pudor#: 'his unwillingness to decline
    the fight.' A literal translation would be impossible. _Pudor_
    implies that he was ashamed to decline lest his refusal should be
    attributed to cowardice.
    33.1: _oblivîscor_.
    33.2: dependent on #oblîtus#: H 454 (406, II): M 588: A 219, 1:
    G 376: B 206, 1.
    33.3: #excussum trânsfîxit#: cf. p. 2, n. 8.
    33.4: #oportet restituâs#: 'it is fitting that you restore.'
    _Oportet_ is construed either with the infinitive or with the
    subjunctive of result with _ut_ omitted.
    33.5: Why abl.?
    33.6: #in posterum# (cf. p. 4, n. 9) = 'for the future.'
    33.7: Imperative of _eô_.
    33.8: Cf. _Stâbant ad pâlum dêligâti_, IX, 21.
    33.9: _êrumpô_.
    33.10: #omnî . . . vîtâ#: 'throughout his whole subsequent life.'
    In this sense the simple acc., or the acc. with _per_ is far more
    common. #deinde#, standing between an adj. and a noun, may be
    rendered by an adj.: cf. p. 10, n. 14.
    33.11: #in . . . abeat#: 'passes over into,' 'degenerates into.'
    33.12: #fuit . . . sed#: we would say, 'was, to be sure, . . .
    but, after all,' i.e. 'although he was . . . yet.' In this sense
    _quidem . . . sed_ is commonly used: cf. p. 10, n. 10.
    33.13: H 426 (385, I): M 531: A 227: G 346: B 187, II.
    33.14: Cf. p. 3, n. 6.
    33.15: Sc. _mîlitî_, and join with _dedit_.
    33.16: Sc. _commîlitônem_.
    33.17: Sc. _esse_.
    34.1: _praefor_.
    34.2: H 426 (385): M 531: A 227: G 346: B 187, II.
    34.3: Join with _propriam_. _Proprius_, like _similis_, is
    construed with both the gen. and the dat.
    34.4: dependent on #ostendit#, l. 81.
    34.5: supine of _conqueror_, expressing purpose. Cf. p. 5, n. 20.
    34.6: 'when praetor,' or 'during his praetorship.'
    34.7: Many, indeed most, governors of provinces enriched
    themselves by extortion.
    34.8: See Vocab., _cônscrîptus_.
    34.9: #summae . . . perîtissimô#: these words contain the reasons
    why #Id . . . concessum est#.
    34.10: _percellô_.
    34.11: #lûcem . . . sustinuit#: 'he refused to live longer.' How
    literally?
    34.12: The context must determine whether #proximâ nocte# = 'the
    next night' or 'last night.'
    34.13: _pergô_.
    34.14: 'role.' This meaning of _partês_ is borrowed from the
    theater.
    34.15: #nê . . . quidem# is a very strong negative, and generally
    emphasizes some word or phrase placed between the _nê_ and the
    _quidem_.]


#XIV. Publius Decius# [[stripped text]]

P. Decius, Valerio Maximo et Cornelio Cosso consulibus, tribunus militum
fuit. Exercitu Romano in angustiis Gauri montis clauso Decius editum
collem conspexit imminentem hostium castris. Accepto praesidio verticem
occupavit, hostes terruit, consuli spatium dedit ad subducendum agmen in
aequiorem locum. Ipse, colle, quem insederat, undique armatis
circumdato, intempesta nocte per medias hostium custodias somno
oppressas incolumis evasit. Qua re ab exercitu donatus est corona
civica, quae dabatur ei, qui cives in bello servasset. Consul fuit bello
Latino cum Manlio Torquato. Hoc bello cum utrique consuli somnio
obvenisset eos victores futuros, quorum dux in proelio cecidisset,
convenit inter eos uti, utrius cornu in acie laboraret, is diis se
Manibus devoveret. Inclinante sua parte Decius se et hostes diis Manibus
devovit. Armatus in equum insiluit ac se in medios hostes immisit:
corruit obrutus telis et victoriam suis reliquit.


  #XIV. Pûblius Decius# [[as printed]]

  [Sidenote: B.C. 343.]

  [Sidenote: B.C. 340.]

    [Illustration: CORÔNA CÎVICA]

  P. Decius,[1] Valeriô[2] Mâximô et Cornêliô Cossô cônsulibus,
  tribûnus mîlitum fuit. Exercitû Rômânô in angustiîs Gaurî
  montis clausô[3] Decius êditum collem cônspexit imminentem
  hostium castrîs. Acceptô praesidiô verticem[4] occupâvit, hostês
  terruit, cônsulî spatium dedit ad subdûcendum âgmen in aequiôrem   {5}
  locum. Ipse, colle, quem însêderat,[5] undique
  armâtîs circumdatô, intempestâ nocte
  per[6] mediâs hostium cûstôdiâs somnô oppressâs[7]
  incolumis êvâsit. Quâ rê ab exercitû
  dônâtus est corônâ cîvicâ, quae dabâtur eî,                       {10}
  quî cîvês in bellô servâsset. Cônsul fuit bellô
  Latînô cum Mânliô[8] Torquâtô. Hôc
  bellô cum[9] utrîque cônsulî somniô obvênisset
  eôs victôrês futûrôs, quôrum dux in proeliô cecidisset,
  convênit inter eôs utî, utrîus cornû in aciê labôrâret, is diîs[10]
  sê Mânibus dêvovêret. Inclînante suâ parte Decius sê et hostês    {16}
  diîs Mânibus dêvôvit.[11] Armâtus in equum însiluit ac sê in mediôs
  hostês immîsit: corruit obrutus têlîs et victôriam suîs relîquit.

    [Footnotes: XIV (page 35)

    35.1: His full name was P. Decius Mus.
    35.2: #Valeriô . . . cônsulibus#: 'in the consulship of,' etc. For
    the abl. abs. consisting of two nouns, see H 489 (431, 4): M 639:
    A 255, _a_: G 409: B 227, 1. For another method of dating events,
    cf. XII, 1.
    35.3: _claudô_.
    35.4: Sc. _collis_.
    35.5: _însideô_.
    35.6: #per . . . cûstôdiâs#: 'through the _midst of_ the enemy's
    pickets.' Cf. l. 17, #in mediôs hostês#, 'against the enemy's
    center.' Note the difference between the Latin and the English
    idioms. H 497, 4 (440, N. 1-2): M 565: A 193: G 291, R. 2:
    B 241, 1.
    35.7: _opprimô_.
    35.8: Cf. XIII, 41.
    35.9: #cum . . . obvênisset#: 'when the two consuls had dreamed.'
    How literally? The subject of #obvênisset# is #eôs . . .
    cecidisset#. So the subject of #convênit# is #utî . . .
    dêvovêret#.
    35.10: See Vocab., _Mânês_.
    35.11: Decius' act was called #dêvôtiô#, and proceeded from the
    idea that for the victim which the Manes seemed to be claiming
    another might be substituted. According to Livy, Decius used this
    formula: "As a substitute for the commonwealth, the army, the
    legions, and the allies of the Roman people I devote to the Manes
    myself and the legions and allies of the enemy."]


#XV. Manius Curius# [[stripped text]]

Manius Curius contra Samnites profectus eos ingentibus proeliis vicit.
In quo bello cum permultum agri hominumque maximam vim cepisset, ipse
inde ditari adeo noluit, ut, cum interversae pecuniae argueretur,
catillo ligneo, quo uti ad sacrificia consueverat, in medium prolato
iuraret se nihil amplius de praeda hostili in domum suam convertisse.
Curio ad focum sedenti in agresti scamno et ex ligneo catillo cenanti
cum magnum auri pondus Samnites attulissent, repudiati ab eo sunt
dixitque non aurum habere sibi praeclarum videri, sed iis qui haberent
aurum imperare. Quo responso Curius Samnitibus ostendit se neque acie
vinci neque pecunia corrumpi posse. Agri capti septena iugera populo
viritim divisit; cumque ipsi senatus iugera quinquaginta adsignaret,
plus accipere noluit quam singulis civibus erat datum, dixitque
perniciosum esse civem, qui eo, quod reliquis tribueretur, contentus non
esset.

Postea consul creatus adversus Pyrrhum missus est: cumque in Capitolio
delectum haberet et iuniores taedio belli nomina non darent, coniectis
in urnam omnium tribuum nominibus primum nomen urna extractum citari
iussit et cum adulescens non responderet, bona eius hastae subiecit,
deinde cum is questus de iniuria consulis tribunos plebis appellasset,
ipsum quoque vendidit, nihil opus esse rei publicae eo cive, qui
nesciret parere, dicens. Neque tribuni plebis adulescenti auxilio
fuerunt; posteaque res in consuetudinem abiit, ut delectu rite acto, qui
militiam detrectaret, in servitutem venderetur. Hoc terrore ceteri
adacti nomina promptius dederunt.

His copiis Curius Pyrrhi exercitum cecidit deque eo rege triumphavit.
Insignem triumphum fecerunt quattuor elephanti cum turribus suis, tum
primum Romae visi. Victus rex relicto Tarenti praesidio in Epirum
revertit. Cum autem bellum renovaturus putaretur, Manium Curium iterum
consulem fieri placuit. Sed inopinata mors regis Romanos metu liberavit.
Pyrrhus enim, dum Argos oppugnat, urbem iam ingressus a iuvene quodam
Argivo lancea leviter vulneratus est. Mater adulescentis, anus
paupercula, cum aliis mulieribus e tecto domus proelium spectabat; quae
cum vidisset Pyrrhum in auctorem vulneris sui magno impetu ferri,
periculo filii sui commota protinus tegulam corripuit et utraque manu
libratam in caput regis deiecit.


    [[36]]

  #XV. Mânius Curius# [[as printed]]

  Mânius Curius contrâ Samnîtês profectus[1] eôs ingentibus proeliîs
  vîcit.[2] In quô bellô cum permultum agrî[3] hominumque[3]
  mâximam vim[4] cêpisset,[5] ipse inde[6] dîtârî adeô[7] nôluit, ut,
      cum                                                            {3}
  interversae[8] pecûniae arguerêtur, catîllô[9] lîgneô, quô[10] ûtî ad
  sacrificia cônsuêverat,[11] in medium prôlâtô iûrâret sê nihil amplius
  dê praedâ hostîlî in domum suam convertisse. Curiô[12] ad focum    {6}
  sedentî in agrestî scamnô et ex lîgneô catîllô cênantî cum mâgnum
  aurî pondus Samnîtês attulissent,[13] repudiâtî ab eô sunt dîxitque
  nôn[14] aurum habêre[15] sibi praeclârum vidêrî, sed iîs quî habêrent
  aurum imperâre.[15] Quô respônsô Curius Samnîtibus ostendit sê    {10}
  neque aciê vincî neque pecûniâ corrumpî posse. Agrî captî septêna
  iûgera populô virîtim dîvîsit[16]; cumque ipsî senâtus iûgera
  quînquâgintâ adsîgnâret, plûs accipere nôluit quam singulîs cîvibus
  erat datum, dîxitque perniciôsum esse cîvem,[17] quî eô,[18] quod
  reliquîs tribuerêtur, contentus nôn esset.[19]                    {15}

  Posteâ cônsul creâtus adversus Pyrrhum missus est: cumque
  in Capitôliô dêlêctum habêret et iûniôrês taediô[20] bellî nômina[21]
  nôn darent, coniectîs in ûrnam omnium tribuum nôminibus
  prîmum[22] nômen ûrnâ extrâctum citârî iussit et cum adulêscêns nôn
  respondêret, bona[23] êius hastae subiêcit, deinde cum is         {20}
    [[37]]
  questus[1] dê iniûriâ cônsulis tribûnôs[2] plêbis appellâsset, ipsum
      quoque
  vêndidit, nihil[3] opus esse reî pûblicae eô cîve,[4] quî nescîret
  pârêre, dîcêns. Neque tribûnî plêbis adulêscentî[5] auxiliô[5]
      fuêrunt;
  posteâque rês[6] in cônsuêtûdinem abiit, ut dêlêctû rîte âctô,    {24}
  quî[7] mîlitiam dêtrêctâret, in servitûtem vênderêtur. Hôc[8] terrôre
  cêterî adâctî[9] nômina prômptius dedêrunt.

    [Illustration: ELEPHANT]

  Hîs côpiîs Curius Pyrrhî exercitum cecîdit[10] dêque eô rêge
  triumphâvit. Însîgnem[11] triumphum fêcêrunt quattuor elephantî
  cum turribus suîs, tum prîmum Rômae[12]
  vîsî. Victus rêx relîctô Tarentî[12] praesidiô                    {30}
  in Êpîrum revertit. Cum[13] autem
  bellum renovâtûrus putârêtur, Mânium
  Curium iterum cônsulem fierî placuit.[14]
  Sed inopînâta mors rêgis Rômânôs metû
  lîberâvit. Pyrrhus enim, dum Argôs                                {35}
  oppûgnat,[15] urbem iam ingressus â iuvene
  quôdam Argîvô lanceâ leviter vulnerâtus
  est. Mâter adulêscentis, anus paupercula,
  cum aliîs mulieribus ê têctô domûs proelium
  spectâbat; quae cum vîdisset Pyrrhum in auctôrem vulneris         {40}
  suî mâgnô impetû ferrî,[16] perîculô fîliî suî commôta prôtinus
      têgulam
  corripuit et utrâque manû lîbrâtam[17] in caput rêgis dêiêcit.

    [Footnotes: XV (pages 36-37)

    36.1: _proficîscor_.
    36.2: _vincô_.
    36.3: partitive gen.: cf. p. 30, n. 2.
    36.4: Cf. p. 4, n. 11.
    36.5: _capiô_.
    36.6: i.e. from the _ager_, or the money derived from the sale of
    the _hominês_.
    36.7: Cf. p. 26, n. 8.
    36.8: See p. 5, n. 15; cf. also H 456 (409, II): M 582: A 220:
    G 378: B 208, 1.
    36.9: #catîllô . . . prôlâtô# (_prôferô_) #iûrâret# = _catîllum
    prôferret et iûrâret_. Cf. p. 2, n. 8.
    36.10: H 477, I (421, I): M 253: A 249: G 407: B 218, 1.
    36.11: _cônsuêscô_.
    36.12: Join with #attulissent#.
    36.13: _adferô_.
    36.14: #nôn . . . imperâre#: 'it was not the having gold that
    seemed to him glorious, but the ruling over those who had it.'
    Give Curius' exact words.
    36.15: subjects of #vidêrî#: cf. p. 6, n. 16.
    36.16: = _distribuit_.
    36.17: We would say, '_that_ citizen.'
    36.18: H 476, 1 (421, III): M 629: A 254, _b_, 2: G 401, N. 6:
    B 219.
    36.19: Why subjunctive?
    36.20: abl. of cause.
    36.21: _nômina dare_ = to hand in one's name to a recruiting
    officer, i.e. 'to volunteer.'
    36.22: #prîmum nômen#: i.e. the man whose name was first drawn.
    36.23: #bona . . . subiêcit#: i.e. he sold his goods at auction.
    At Roman auctions, especially of booty taken in war, a spear was
    set in the ground, just as nowadays a flag is exposed.
    37.1: _queror_.
    37.2: The _tribûnî plêbis_ had been created for the express
    purpose of protecting the people from unjust treatment by the
    patrician magistrates, especially the consuls. They could veto the
    acts of any magistrate.
    37.3: #nihil# (adv. acc.) #. . . cîve#: 'the state had no need of
    that citizen.'
    37.4: abl. with #opus#: H 477, III (414, IV): M 646: A 243, _e_:
    G 406: B 218, 2.
    37.5: For the two datives see p. 25, n. 6.
    37.6: #rês . . . âbiit#: i.e. it became a regular custom. Cf.
    _sevêritâs . . . abeat_, XIII, 63.
    37.7: 'whoever.'
    37.8: #Hôc terrôre#: i.e. 'by the terror occasioned by this
    (act).'
    37.9: _adigô_.
    37.10: At Beneventum, 275 B.C.
    37.11: #Însîgnem . . . elephantî#: 'this triumph was made notable
    by the presence of four elephants.' How literally?
    37.12: Cf. p. 25, n. 7.
    37.13: #Cum . . . putârêtur#: with #renovâtûrus# sc. _esse_. For
    the personal construction, see p. 7, n. 12.
    37.14: Sc. _populô Rômânô_. Its subject is the clause #Mânium
    . . . fierî#; hence the infin. #fierî#.
    37.15: '_was_ besieging.' Cf. p. 3, n. 14.
    37.16: 'rushing.' How literally?
    37.17: #lîbrâtam . . . dêiêcit# = _lîbrâvit et dêiêcit_.]


#XVI. Gaius Duilius# [[stripped text]]

Gaius Duilius Poenos navali pugna primus devicit. Qui cum videret naves
Romanas a Punicis velocitate superari, manus ferreas sive corvos,
machinam ad comprehendendas hostium naves tenendasque utilem,
excogitavit. Quae manus ubi hostilem apprehenderant navem, superiecto
ponte transgrediebatur Romanus et in ipsorum ratibus comminus
dimicabant, unde Romanis, qui robore praestabant, facilis victoria fuit.
Celeriter sunt expugnatae naves Punicae triginta, in quibus etiam
praetoria septiremis capta est, mersae tredecim.

Duilius victor Romam reversus primus navalem triumphum egit. Nulla
victoria Romanis gratior fuit, quod invicti terra iam etiam mari
plurimum possent. Itaque Duilio concessum est, ut per omnem vitam
praelucente funali et praecinente tibicine a cena rediret.

Hannibal, dux classis Punicae, e navi quae iam capiebatur, in scapham
saltu se demittens Romanorum manus effugit. Veritus autem, ne in patria
classis amissae poenas daret, civium odium astutia avertit, nam ex illa
infelici pugna priusquam cladis nuntius domum perveniret quendam ex
amicis Carthaginem misit. Qui postquam curiam intravit, "Consulit"
inquit "vos Hannibal, cum dux Romanorum magnis copiis maritimis
instructis advenerit, num cum eo confligere debeat?" Acclamavit
universus senatus non esse dubium quin confligi oporteret. Tum ille
"Conflixit" inquit "et superatus est." Ita non potuerunt factum damnare,
quod ipsi fieri debuisse iudicaverant. Sic Hannibal victus crucis
supplicium effugit: nam eo poenae genere dux re male gesta apud Poenos
adficiebatur.


    [[38]]

  #XVI. Gâius Duîlius# [[as printed]]

  Gâius Duîlius Poenôs nâvâlî pûgnâ prîmus[1] dêvîcit.
  Quî cum vidêret nâvês Rômânâs â Pûnicîs
  vêlôcitâte superârî, manûs ferreâs sîve corvôs,
  mâchinam ad comprehendendâs hostium nâvês
  tenendâsque ûtilem, excôgitâvit. Quae[2] manûs ubi                 {5}
  hostîlem apprehenderant nâvem, superiectô ponte
  trânsgrediêbâtur Rômânus[3] et in ipsôrum[4] ratibus
  comminus dîmicâbant, unde[5] Rômânîs, quî rôbore
  praestâbant, facilis victôria fuit. Celeriter sunt
  expûgnâtae nâvês Pûnicae trîgintâ, in quibus etiam                {10}
  praetôria[6] septirêmis[7] capta est, mersae[8] tredecim.

    [Illustration: COLUMNA RÔSTRÂTA OF DUÎLIUS]

  Duîlius victor Rômam reversus prîmus
  nâvâlem triumphum êgit. Nûlla victôria
  Rômânîs grâtior fuit, quod[9] invictî terrâ
  iam etiam marî plûrimum[10] possent.[9] Itaque                    {15}
  Duîliô concessum est, ut per omnem vîtam
  praelûcente fûnâli et praecinente tîbîcine â
  cênâ redîret.[11]

    [Illustration: TÎBÎCEN]

  Hannibal, dux classis Pûnicae, ê nâvî
  quae iam capiêbâtur, in scapham saltû sê dêmittêns Rômânôrum      {20}
  manûs effûgit. Veritus autem, nê[12] in patriâ classis[13] âmissae
    [[39]]
  poenâs daret, cîvium odium âstûtiâ âvertit, nam ex illâ înfêlîcî
  pûgnâ priusquam[1] clâdis nûntius domum[2] pervenîret[1] quendam
  ex amîcîs Carthâginem[2] mîsit. Quî postquam cûriam intrâvit,
  "Cônsulit" inquit "vôs Hannibal, cum[3] dux Rômânôrum mâgnîs      {25}
  côpiîs maritimîs înstrûctîs advênerit,[3] num cum eô cônflîgere
  dêbeat?" Acclâmâvit ûniversus senâtus nôn esse dubium quîn[4]
  cônflîgî oportêret. Tum ille "Cônflîxit" inquit "et superâtus
  est." Ita nôn potuêrunt factum damnâre, quod ipsî fierî dêbuisse
  iûdicâverant. Sîc Hannibal victus crucis supplicium effûgit:      {30}
  nam eô[5] poenae genere dux rê[6] male gestâ apud Poenôs
  adficiêbâtur.

    [Footnotes: XVI (pages 38-39)

    38.1: #prîmus dêvîcit#: 'was the first (Roman) to conquer.' Cf.
    _prîmus êgit_, l. 12. H 497, and 1 (443 and 1): A 191: G 325, R.
    6: B 239. Such a phrase as _prîmus fuit dêvincere_ is never used
    by good writers.
    38.2: 'These'; cf. p. 4, n. 3.
    38.3: a collective noun: 'the Romans.'
    38.4: Sc. _hostium_.
    38.5: = 'and as a consequence.'
    38.6: Cf. _rêgius_, I, 17. The Romans applied the term _praetor_
    to the commander of any foreign force.
    38.7: Sc. _nâvis_. At this time Carthaginian ships generally had
    five banks of oars. In building the fleet commanded by Duilius,
    the Romans, it is said, took as their model a Carthaginian vessel
    which had been wrecked on the coast of Italy.
    38.8: _mergô_; sc. _sunt_.
    38.9: Cf. p. 14, n. 1.
    38.10: 'were supreme'; cf. p. 23, n. 1.
    38.11: In commemoration also of the victory the Columna Rôstrâta
    was erected in the Forum.
    38.12: #nê . . . daret#: a clause of purpose, dependent on
    #veritus#: H 567 (498, III) M 897: A 331, _f_: G 550: B 296, 2.
    38.13: #classis âmissae#: 'for losing the fleet'; see p. 5, n. 15.
    39.1: Cf. p. 12, n. 5.
    39.2: Why accusative?
    39.3: causal subjunctive.
    39.4: _quîn_ with a subjunctive of result is regularly used after
    negative expressions of doubt: H 595, 1 (504, 3, 2): M 913: A 332,
    _g_, R.: G 555, 2: B 298.
    39.5: #eô . . . adficiêbâtur#: 'in that way . . . was punished.'
    How literally?
    39.6: #rê male gestâ#: 'if unsuccessful.' How literally?]


#XVII. Marcus Atilius Regulus# [[stripped text]]

Marcus Regulus cum Poenos magna clade adfecisset, Hanno Carthaginiensis
ad eum venit, quasi de pace acturus, re vera ut tempus extraheret, donec
novae copiae ex Africa advenirent. Is ubi ad consulem accessit, exortus
est militum clamor auditaque vox, idem huic faciendum esse, quod paucis
ante annis Cornelio consuli a Poenis factum esset. Cornelius enim, velut
in conloquium per fraudem evocatus, a Poenis comprehensus erat et in
vincula coniectus. Iam Hanno timere incipiebat, sed periculum astuto
responso avertit: "Hoc vero" inquit "si feceritis, nihilo eritis Afris
meliores." Consul tacere iussit eos, qui par pari referri volebant, et
conveniens gravitati Romanae responsum dedit: "Isto te metu, Hanno,
fides Romana liberat." De pace, quia neque Poenus serio agebat et consul
victoriam quam pacem malebat, non convenit.

Regulus deinde in Africam primus Romanorum ducum traiecit. Clypeam urbem
et trecenta castella expugnavit, neque cum hominibus tantum, sed etiam
cum monstris dimicavit. Nam cum ad flumen Bagradam castra haberet,
anguis mira magnitudine exercitum Romanorum vexabat; multos milites
ingenti ore corripuit; plures caudae verbere elisit; nonnullos ipso
pestilentis halitus adflatu exanimavit. Neque is telorum ictu perforari
poterat, durissima squamarum lorica omnia tela facile repellente.
Confugiendum fuit ad machinas advectisque ballistis et catapultis, velut
arx quaedam munita, deiciendus hostis fuit. Tandem saxorum pondere
oppressus iacuit, sed cruore suo flumen corporisque pestifero adflatu
vicina loca infecit Romanosque castra inde submovere coegit. Corium
beluae, centum et viginti pedes longum, Romam misit Regulus.

Huic ob res bene gestas imperium in annum proximum prorogatum est. Quod
ubi cognovit Regulus, scripsit senatui vilicum suum in agello, quem
septem iugerum habebat, mortuum esse et servum, occasionem nactum,
aufugisse ablato instrumento rustico ideoque petere se ut sibi successor
in Africam mitteretur, ne, deserto agro, non esset unde uxor et liberi
alerentur. Senatus, acceptis litteris, res quas Regulus amiserat publica
pecunia redimi iussit, agellum colendum locavit, alimenta coniugi ac
liberis praebuit. Regulus deinde multis proeliis Carthaginiensium opes
contudit eosque pacem petere coegit. Quam cum Regulus nollet nisi
durissimis condicionibus dare, a Lacedaemoniis illi auxilium petierunt.

Lacedaemonii Xanthippum, virum belli peritissimum, Carthaginiensibus
miserunt, a quo Regulus victus est ultima pernicie: nam duo tantum milia
hominum ex omni Romano exercitu refugerunt et Regulus ipse captus et in
carcerem coniectus est. Inde Romam de permutandis captivis missus est
dato iureiurando. ut, si non impetrasset, rediret ipse Carthaginem. Qui
cum Romam venisset, inductus in senatum mandata exposuit; sententiam ne
diceret recusavit; quamdiu iureiurando hostium teneretur, se non esse
senatorem. Iussus tamen sententiam dicere, negavit esse utile captivos
Poenos reddi, illos enim adulescentes esse et bonos duces, se iam
confectum senectute. Cuius cum valuisset auctoritas, captivi retenti
sunt, ipse, cum retineretur a propinquis et amicis, tamen Carthaginem
rediit: neque vero tunc ignorabat se ad crudelissimum hostem et ad
exquisita supplicia proficisci, sed iusiurandum conservandum putavit.
Reversum Carthaginienses omni cruciatu necaverunt: palpebris enim
resectis aliquamdiu in loco tenebricoso tenuerunt: deinde cum sol esset
ardentissimus, repente eductum intueri caelum coegerunt; postremo in
arcam ligneam, undique clavis praeacutis horrentem et tam angustam, ut
erectus perpetuo manere cogeretur, incluserunt. Ita dum fessum corpus,
quocumque inclinabat, stimulis ferreis confoditur, vigiliis et dolore
continuo interemptus est. Hic fuit Atilii Reguli exitus, ipsa vita
clarior et inlustrior.


  #XVII. Mârcus Atîlius Rêgulus# [[as printed]]

  [Sidenote: B.C. 256.]

  Mârcus Rêgulus cum Poenôs mâgnâ clâde[7] adfêcisset, Hannô
  Carthâginiênsis ad eum vênit, quasi dê pâce âctûrus,[8] rê
  vêrâ ut[8] tempus extraheret,[8] dônec[9] novae côpiae ex Âfricâ
  advenîrent.[9] Is ubi ad cônsulem accessit, exortus[10] est mîlitum
  clâmor audîtaque vôx, idem[11] huîc faciendum esse, quod paucîs    {5}
  ante annîs[12] Cornêliô cônsulî â Poenîs factum esset. Cornêlius
  enim, velut in conloquium per fraudem êvocâtus, â Poenîs
  comprehênsus erat et in vincula coniectus. Iam Hannô timêre
  incipiêbat, sed perîculum âstûtô respônsô âvertit: "Hôc vêrô" inquit
    [[40]]
  "sî fêceritis,[1] nihilô[2] eritis Âfrîs[3] meliôrês." Cônsul tacêre
  iussit eôs, quî pâr[4] parî referrî volêbant, et conveniêns[5]
      gravitâtî                                                     {11}
  Rômânae respônsum dedit: "Istô tê metû, Hannô, fidês Rômâna
  lîberat." Dê pâce, quia neque Poenus sêriô agêbat et cônsul
  victôriam quam pâcem mâlêbat, nôn convênit.

  Rêgulus deinde in Âfricam prîmus[6] Rômânôrum ducum trâiêcit.     {15}
  Clypeam urbem et trecenta[7] castella expûgnâvit, neque[8]
  cum hominibus tantum, sed etiam cum mônstrîs dîmicâvit. Nam
  cum ad flûmen Bagradam castra habêret, anguis mîrâ mâgnitûdine
  exercitum Rômânôrum vexâbat; multôs mîlitês ingentî ôre corripuit;
  plûrês caudae verbere êlîsit[9]; nônnûllôs ipsô pêstilentis       {20}
  hâlitûs adflâtû exanimâvit. Neque is têlôrum îctû perforârî
  poterat, dûrissimâ[10] squâmârum lôrîcâ omnia têla facile repellente.
  Cônfugiendum[11] fuit ad mâchinâs advectîsque ballistîs[12]       {23}
  et catapultîs, velut[13] arx quaedam mûnîta, dêiciendus hostis fuit.
  Tandem saxôrum pondere oppressus[14] iacuit, sed cruôre suô flûmen
  corporisque pêstiferô adflâtû vîcîna loca înfêcit Rômânôsque castra
  inde submovêre coêgit.[15] Corium bêluae, centum et vîgintî pedês[16]
  longum, Rômam mîsit Rêgulus.

  Huîc ob rês[17] bene gestâs imperium in annum proximum prôrogâtum
    [[41]]
  est. Quod ubi côgnôvit Rêgulus, scrîpsit senâtuî vîlicum          {30}
  suum in agellô, quem septem iûgerum[1] habêbat, mortuum esse et
  servum, occâsiônem nactum,[2] aufûgisse ablâtô înstrûmentô[3]
  rûsticô ideôque petere sê ut sibi[4] successor in Âfricam mitterêtur,
  nê, dêsertô agrô, nôn esset unde[5] uxor et lîberî alerentur.[6]  {34}
  Senâtus, acceptîs litterîs, rês quâs Rêgulus âmîserat pûblicâ pecûniâ
  redimî iussit, agellum colendum[7] locâvit, alimenta[8] coniugî ac
  lîberîs praebuit. Rêgulus deinde multîs proeliîs Carthâginiênsium
  opês contudit[9] eôsque pâcem petere coêgit. Quam cum
  Rêgulus nôllet nisi dûrissimîs condiciônibus[10] dare, â
  Lacedaemoniîs illî auxilium petiêrunt.                            {40}

  [Sidenote: B.C. 255]

  [Sidenote: B.C. 251]

  Lacedaemoniî Xanthippum, virum bellî perîtissimum, Carthâginiênsibus
  mîsêrunt, â quô Rêgulus victus est ûltimâ perniciê[10]:
  nam duo tantum mîlia hominum ex omnî Rômânô
  exercitû refûgêrunt et Rêgulus ipse captus et in carcerem
  coniectus est. Inde Rômam dê permûtandîs captîvîs missus          {45}
  est datô iûreiûrandô. ut,[11] sî nôn impetrâsset,[12] redîret ipse
  Carthâginem. Quî cum Rômam vênisset, inductus in senâtum
  mandâta exposuit; sententiam[13] nê dîceret recûsâvit; quamdiû[14]
  iûreiûrandô hostium tenêrêtur, sê nôn esse senâtôrem. Iûssus
  tamen sententiam dîcere, negâvit[15] esse ûtile captîvôs Poenôs   {50}
    [[42]]
  reddî, illôs enim adulêscentês esse et bonôs ducês, sê iam
  cônfectum[1] senectûte. Cûius cum[2] valuisset auctôritâs, captîvî
  retentî sunt, ipse, cum retinêrêtur â propinquîs et amîcîs, tamen
  Carthâginem rediit: neque vêrô tunc îgnôrâbat sê ad crûdêlissimum
  hostem et ad exquîsîta supplicia proficîscî, sed iûsiûrandum      {55}
  cônservandum[3] putâvit. Reversum[4] Carthâginiênsês omnî
  cruciâtû necâvêrunt: palpebrîs enim resectîs aliquamdiû in locô
  tenebricôsô tenuêrunt: deinde cum sôl esset ârdentissimus, repente
  êductum intuêrî caelum coêgêrunt; postrêmô in arcam lîgneam,
  undique clâvîs praeacûtîs horrentem et tam angustam, ut êrêctus   {60}
  perpetuô manêre côgerêtur, inclûsêrunt. Ita dum fessum corpus,
  quôcumque inclînâbat, stimulîs ferreîs cônfoditur, vigiliîs et dolôre
  continuô interêmptus est. Hîc fuit Atîliî Rêgulî exitus, ipsâ vîtâ
  clârior et inlûstrior.

    [Footnotes: XVII (pages 39-42)

    39.7: #clâde adfêcisset# = 'had inflicted defeat upon.' Cf. _eô
    genere . . . adficiêbâtur_, XVI, 31. The reference is to the naval
    victory off Ecnomus, in Sicily.
    39.8: Note carefully the two ways of expressing purpose, the
    future participle being exactly equivalent to _ut_ with the
    subjunctive. See p. xviii, E 5; #quasi# = 'as if,' and is
    contrasted with #rê vêrâ#, 'in reality.'
    39.9: The subjunctive in reality expresses purpose. See also p.
    xx, G 3.
    39.10: _exorior_.
    39.11: #idem . . . esse#: 'the same thing _ought to be done_ to
    him.' The gerundive with _esse_ denotes either physical necessity
    ('must'), or moral obligation ('ought').
    39.12: abl. of the measure of difference: H 479 (423): M 655:
    A 250: G 403: B 223. #paucîs annîs# is a sort of temporal adverb
    with _ante_.
    40.1: Latin is extremely exact in the use of the tenses. Of two
    _past_ actions the prior is expressed by the _pluperfect_ tense;
    of two _future_ actions the prior is expressed by the _future
    perfect_ tense. Apply this principle here. We say simply, 'if
    you do.'
    40.2: Join with #meliôrês#, and cf. p. 39, n. 12.
    40.3: i.e. the Carthaginians. To the Roman mind _Pûnica fidês_ was
    a synonym for the vilest treachery. So Livy says of the great
    Hannibal that his character was marred by 'worse than Punic
    treachery.' For #Âfrîs#, see p. 10, n. 18.
    40.4: #pâr . . . referrî# = 'retaliation.' How literally?
    40.5: 'consistent with.'
    40.6: #prîmus . . . trâiêcit#: cf. p. 38, n. 1.
    40.7: indefinite, like our 'hundreds of.' _Sêscentî_ and _mîlle_
    are often used in the same way.
    40.8: = _et nôn_ (cf. l. 13).
    40.9: _êlîdô_.
    40.10: #dûrissimâ . . . repellente#: what does the abl. abs.
    express?
    40.11: #Cônfugiendum . . . ad#: impersonal passive: 'they had to
    resort to.' Cf. p. 39, n. 11.
    40.12: The _ballistae_ and _catapultae_ were the artillery of
    antiquity. It is said that from the _ballistae_ stones weighing
    one hundred pounds could be sent half a mile.
    40.13: #velut . . . mûnîta#: to be taken with what follows.
    40.14: _opprimô_.
    40.15: _côgô_.
    40.16: acc. of extent (cf. p. 12, n. 1) with #longum#.
    40.17: #rês bene gestâs#: 'successes,' 'exploits.' Contrast _rê
    male gestâ_, XVI, 31, and note.
    41.1: Cf. p. 18, n. 17.
    41.2: #occâsiônem nactum# (_nancîscor_): 'seizing the
    opportunity.'
    41.3: #înstrûmentô rûsticô#: 'his farming implements.'
    41.4: Join with #successor#, and cf. p. 26, n. 5.
    41.5: #unde . . . alerentur#: 'the wherewithal to support,' etc.
    41.6: subjunctive partly of purpose, partly by attraction, for
    which see p. 13, n. 10.
    41.7: #colendum#: 'to be tilled' (cf. p. 2, n. 18), for Regulus'
    benefit. In such cases the produce of the farm was divided equally
    between owner and tenant.
    41.8: #alimenta . . . praebuit#: i.e. they were supported at
    public expense till the harvest of that year was gathered. No
    salary was given to Roman officials.
    41.9: _contundô_.
    41.10: abl. of manner: H 473, 3 (419, III): M 635: A 248: G 399:
    B 220, 1.
    41.11: #ut . . . redîret# gives the purpose of the Carthaginians
    in exacting the oath.
    41.12: subjunctive in indirect discourse. Regulus said: _Sî nôn
    impetrâverô, . . . redîbô._
    41.13: #sententiam . . . recûsâvit#: 'he refused to express his
    opinion.' _recûsâre_ is construed (1) with the simple infinitive;
    (2) with _nê_ and a subjunctive of purpose; (3) with _quîn_ or
    _quôminus_ and a subjunctive of result.
    41.14: #quamdiû . . . senâtôrem#: indirect discourse = '(saying
    that) as long as,' etc.
    41.15: #negâvit esse ûtile#: 'he _said_ that it was _not_
    expedient.' In such sentences _negâre_ rather than _nôn dîcere_ is
    used. The subject of #esse# is the clause #captîvôs . . . reddî#.
    42.1: 'exhausted.'
    42.2: Here temporal, but in the next line adversative, as is shown
    by #tamen#: see p. xxii, J.
    42.3: Sc. _esse_, and cf. p. 39, n. 11.
    42.4: Sc. _eum_: 'on his return.' The story is given by no writer
    earlier than Cicero, and modern historians are inclined to view
    the whole narrative as fictitious.]


#XVIII. Appius Claudius Pulcher# [[stripped text]]

Appius Claudius, vir stultae temeritatis, consul adversus Poenos
profectus priorum ducum consilia palam reprehendebat seque, quo die
hostem vidisset, bellum confecturum esse iactitabat. Qui cum, antequam
navale proelium committeret, auspicia haberet pullariusque ei
nuntiasset, pullos non exire e cavea neque vesci, inridens iussit eos in
aquam mergi, ut saltem biberent, quoniam esse nollent. Ea res cum, quasi
iratis diis, milites ad omnia segniores timidioresque fecisset, commisso
proelio magna clades a Romanis accepta est: octo eorum milia caesa sunt,
viginti milia capta. Qua re Claudius postea a populo condemnatus est
damnationisque ignominiam voluntaria morte praevenit. Ea res calamitati
fuit etiam Claudiae, consulis sorori: quae a ludis publicis revertens,
in conferta multitudine aegre procedente carpento, palam optavit ut
frater suus Pulcher revivisceret atque iterum classem amitteret, quo
minor turba Romae foret. Ob vocem illam impiam Claudia quoque damnata
gravisque ei dicta est multa.


  #XVIII. Appius Claudius Pulcher# [[as printed]]

    [Illustration: SACRED CHICKENS / _From the tomb of a Pullârius_]

  [Sidenote: B.C. 249.]

  Appius Claudius, vir stultae temeritâtis, cônsul adversus Poenôs
  profectus priôrum ducum cônsilia palam reprehendêbat
  sêque, quô[5] diê hostem vîdisset, bellum cônfectûrum esse
  iactitâbat. Quî cum, antequam nâvâle proelium committeret,         {4}
  auspicia[6] habêret pullâriusque[7] eî nûntiâsset, pullôs nôn exîre ê
    [[43]]
  caveâ neque vescî, inrîdêns iussit eôs in aquam mergî, ut saltem
  biberent, quoniam êsse[1] nôllent. Ea rês cum, quasi[2] îrâtîs diîs,
  mîlitês ad omnia sêgniôrês timidiôrêsque
  fêcisset, commissô proeliô[3]
  mâgna clâdês â Rômânîs accepta est:                               {10}
  octô eôrum mîlia caesa sunt, vîgintî
  mîlia capta. Quâ re Claudius posteâ â
  populô condemnâtus est damnâtiônisque[4]
  îgnôminiam voluntâriâ morte
  praevênit. Ea rês calamitâtî[5] fuit                              {15}
  etiam Claudiae,[5] cônsulis sorôrî: quae
  â lûdîs pûblicîs revertêns, in[6] cônfertâ
  multitûdine aegrê prôcêdente carpentô,
  palam optâvit ut frâter suus Pulcher
  revîvîsceret atque iterum classem âmitteret,                      {20}
  quô[7] minor turba Rômae foret.[7] Ob vôcem illam impiam
  Claudia quoque damnâta gravisque[8] eî[9] dicta est multa.

    [Footnotes: XVIII (pages 42-43)

    42.5: #quô diê#: we should expect _diê quô_, or _eôdem diê quô_,
    but the antecedent, as often, is incorporated into the relative
    clause and made to agree with the pronoun: H 399, 3 (445, 9):
    A 200, _b_: G 616: B 251, 4.
    42.6: #auspicia habêret#: cf. _auspicia adhibêre_, I, 42.
    42.7: #pullârius . . . vescî#: on setting out for the seat of war,
    the commanding general often took with him a cage of sacred
    chickens, in charge of a special keeper (#pullârius#). If, when
    food was thrown before them, the chickens ate so greedily that
    portions of the food fell from their mouths to the ground, it was
    considered a very favorable omen. The circumstance described in
    the text would be regarded by the superstitious soldiery as of
    very dire significance.
    43.1: infinitive of _edô_.
    43.2: #quasi . . . diîs#: 'because (as they supposed), the gods
    were angry.' Cf. p. 3, n. 6. #îrâtîs diîs# is an abl. abs.
    43.3: The battle was fought off Drepanum, in Sicily. Appius lost
    93 out of 123 ships.
    43.4: #que# here = 'but,' a meaning which it bears more frequently
    after negative sentences (p. 13, n. 12).
    43.5: Cf. p. 25, n. 6.
    43.6: #in . . . carpentô#: an abl. abs., giving the cause of
    #optâvit#.
    43.7: Cf. p. 14, n. 13.
    43.8: #gravis . . . multa#: 'a heavy fine was imposed upon her.'
    43.9: dat. of disadvantage.]


#XIX. Quintus Fabius Maximus# [[stripped text]]

Hannibal, Hamilcaris filius, novem annos natus, a patre aris admotus
odium in Romanos perenne iuravit. Quae res maxime videtur concitasse
secundum Punicum bellum. Nam, mortuo Hamilcare, Hannibal causam belli
quaerens Saguntum, civitatem Hispaniae Romanis foederatam evertit.
Quapropter Roma missi sunt Carthaginem legati, qui Hannibalem, mali
auctorem, exposcerent. Tergiversantibus Poenis Quintus Fabius,
legationis princeps, sinu ex toga facto "Hic" inquit "vobis bellum et
pacem portamus; utrum placet, sumite." Poenis daret utrum vellet
succlamantibus, Fabius, excussa toga, bellum se dare dicit. Poeni
accipere se responderunt et, quibus acciperent animis, iisdem se
gesturos.

Hannibal superatis Pyrenaei et Alpium iugis in Italiam venit. Publium
Scipionem apud Ticinum amnem, Sempronium apud Trebiam, Flaminium apud
Trasumenum profligavit.

Adversus hostem totiens victorem missus Quintus Fabius dictator
Hannibalis impetum mora fregit; namque, priorum ducum cladibus edoctus
belli rationem mutare et adversus Hannibalem, successibus proeliorum
insolentem, recedere ab ancipiti discrimine et tueri tantummodo Italiam
constituit Cunctatorisque nomen et laudem summi ducis meruit. Per loca
alta agmen ducebat modico ab hoste intervallo, ut neque omitteret eum
neque cum eo congrederetur; castris, nisi quantum necessitas cogeret,
miles tenebatur. Dux neque occasioni rei bene gerendae deerat, si qua ab
hoste daretur, neque ullam ipse hosti dabat. Itaque cum ex levibus
proeliis superior discederet, militem minus iam coepit aut virtutis suae
aut fortunae paenitere.

His artibus cum Hannibalem Fabius in agro Falerno locorum angustiis
clausisset, ille sine ullo exercitus detrimento se expedivit. Namque
arida sarmenta in boum cornibus deligata principio noctis incendi
bovesque ad montes, quos Romani insederant, agi iussit. Qui cum accensis
cornibus per montes, per silvas huc illuc discurrerent, Romani miraculo
attoniti constiterunt; ipse Fabius, insidias esse ratus, militem extra
vallum egredi vetuit. Interea Hannibal ex angustiis evasit.

Dein Hannibal, ut Fabio apud suos conflaret invidiam, agrum eius,
omnibus circa vastatis, intactum reliquit. At Fabius, misso Romam Quinto
filio, inviolatum ab hoste agrum vendidit eiusque pretio captivos
Romanos redemit.

Haud grata tamen Romanis erat Fabii cunctatio: eumque pro cauto timidum,
pro cunctatore segnem vocitabant. Augebat invidiam Minucius, magister
equitum, dictatorem criminando: illum in ducendo bello sedulo tempus
terere, quo diutius in magistratu esset solusque et Romae et in exercitu
imperium haberet. His sermonibus accensa plebs dictatori magistrum
equitum imperio aequavit. Hanc iniuriam aequo animo tulit Fabius
exercitumque suum cum Minucio divisit. Cum autem Minucius temere
proelium commisisset, ei periclitanti auxilio venit Fabius. Cuius subito
adventu repressus Hannibal receptui cecinit, palam confessus ab se
Minucium, se a Fabio victum esse. Redeuntem ex acie dixisse eum ferunt
tandem eam nubem, quae sedere in iugis montium solita esset, cum
procella imbrem dedisse. Minucius autem periculo liberatus castra cum
Fabio iunxit et patrem eum appellavit idemque facere milites iussit.

Postea Hannibal Tarento per proditionem potitus est. Hanc urbem ut
Poenis traderent, tredecim fere nobiles iuvenes Tarentini coniuraverant.
Hi, nocte per speciem venandi urbe egressi, ad Hannibalem, qui haud
procul castra habebat, venerunt. Cui cum quid pararent exposuissent,
conlaudavit eos Hannibal monuitque ut redeuntes pecora Carthaginiensium,
quae pastum propulsa essent, ad urbem agerent et veluti praedam ex hoste
factam aut praefecto aut custodibus portarum donarent. Id iterum ac
saepius ab iis factum eoque consuetudinis adducta res est, ut, quocumque
noctis tempore sibilo dedissent signum, porta urbis aperiretur. Tunc
Hannibal eos nocte media cum decem milibus hominum delectorum secutus
est. Ubi portae appropinquarunt, nota iuvenum vox et familiare signum
vigilem excitavit. Duo primi inferebant aprum vasti corporis. Vigil
incautus, dum beluae magnitudinem miratur, venabulo occisus est.
Ingressi proditores ceteros vigiles sopitos obtruncant. Tum Hannibal cum
suo agmine ingreditur: Romani passim trucidantur. Livius Salinator,
Romanorum praefectus, cum iis, qui caedi superfuerunt, in arcem
confugit.

Profectus igitur Fabius ad recipiendum Tarentum urbem obsidione cinxit.
Leve dictu momentum ad rem ingentem perficiendam eum adiuvit. Praefectus
praesidii Tarentini deperibat amore mulierculae, cuius frater in
exercitu Fabii erat. Miles iussus a Fabio pro perfuga Tarentum transiit
ac per sororem praefectum ad tradendam urbem perpulit. Fabius vigilia
prima accessit ad eam partem muri, quam praefectus custodiebat.
Adiuvantibus recipientibusque eius militibus, Romani in urbem
transcenderunt. Inde, proxima porta refracta, Fabius cum exercitu
intravit. Hannibal nuntiata Tarenti oppugnatione, cum ad opem ferendam
festinans captam urbem esse audivisset, "Et Romani" inquit "suum
Hannibalem habent: eadem, qua ceperamus, arte Tarentum amisimus."

Cum postea Livius Salinator coram Fabio gloriaretur, quod arcem
Tarentinam retinuisset, dixissetque eum sua opera Tarentum recepisse,
"Certe" inquit Fabius ridens, "nam nisi tu amisisses, ego numquam
recepissem."

Quintus Fabius iam senex filio suo consuli legatus fuit; cumque in eius
castra veniret, filius obviam patri progressus est, duodecim lictoribus
pro more antecedentibus. Equo vehebatur senex neque appropinquante
consule descendit. Iam ex lictoribus undecim verecundia paternae
maiestatis taciti praeterierant. Quod cum consul animadvertisset,
proximum lictorem iussit inclamare Fabio patri ut ex equo descenderet.
Pater tum desiliens "Non ego, fili," inquit "tuum imperium contempsi,
sed experiri volui num scires consulem te esse." Ad summam senectutem
vixit Fabius Maximus, dignus tanto cognomine. Cautior quam promptior
habitus est, sed insita eius ingenio prudentia ei bello, quod tum
gerebatur, proprie apta erat. Nemini dubium est quin rem Romanam
cunctando restituerit. Ut Scipio pugnando, ita hic non dimicando maxime
civitati Romanae succurrisse visus est. Alter enim celeritate sua
Carthaginem oppressit, alter cunctatione id egit, ne Roma opprimi
posset.


  #XIX. Quîntus Fabius Mâximus# [[as printed]]

  [Sidenote: B.C. 236.]

  [Sidenote: B.C. 219.]

  Hannibal, Hamilcaris[10] fîlius, novem[11] annôs[12] nâtus, â
  patre ârîs admôtus odium in Rômânôs perenne iûrâvit.
  Quae rês mâximê vidêtur concitâsse secundum[13] Pûnicum bellum.
    [[44]]
  Nam, mortuô[1] Hamilcare, Hannibal causam bellî quaerêns Saguntum,
  cîvitâtem Hispâniae Rômânîs[2] foederâtam êvertit.                 {5}
  Quâpropter Rômâ missî sunt Carthâginem
  lêgâtî, quî Hannibalem, malî auctôrem, expôscerent.
  Tergiversantibus Poenîs Quîntus Fabius,
  lêgâtiônis prînceps, sinû ex togâ factô "Hîc"
  inquit "vôbîs bellum et pâcem portâmus; utrum[3]                  {10}
  placet, sûmite." Poenîs daret[4] utrum vellet
  succlâmantibus, Fabius, excussâ[5] togâ, bellum
  sê dare dîcit. Poenî accipere sê respondêrunt et,
  quibus[6] acciperent animîs, iîsdem sê gestûrôs.[7]

    [Illustration: HANNIBAL]

  Hannibal superâtîs Pyrênaeî et Alpium iugîs in Îtaliam vênit.     {15}
  Pûblium[8] Scîpiônem apud Tîcînum[9] amnem, Semprônium apud
  Trebiam, Flâminium apud Trasumênum prôflîgâvit.

  Adversus hostem totiêns victôrem missus Quîntus Fabius            {18}
  dictâtor[10] Hannibalis impetum morâ[11] frêgit; namque, priôrum ducum
  clâdibus êdoctus bellî ratiônem mûtâre et adversus[12] Hannibalem,
  succêssibus proeliôrum însolentem, recêdere[13] ab ancipitî discrîmine
  et tuêrî tantummodo Îtaliam cônstituit Cunctâtôrisque             {22}
  nômen et laudem summî ducis meruit. Per loca alta âgmen
  dûcêbat modicô ab hoste intervâllô,[14] ut neque omitteret[15] eum
    [[45]]
  neque cum eô congrederêtur; castrîs,[1] nisi[2] quantum necessitâs
  côgeret,[2] mîles tenêbâtur. Dux neque occâsiônî[3] reî[4] bene   {26}
  gerendae deerat, sî qua ab hoste darêtur, neque ûllam ipse hostî
  dabat. Itaque cum ex levibus proeliîs superior discêderet,
  mîlitem[5] minus iam coepit aut virtûtis suae aut fortûnae
  paenitêre.                                                        {30}

  Hîs artibus cum Hannibalem Fabius in agrô Falernô locôrum
  angustiîs clausisset, ille sine ûllô exercitûs dêtrîmentô sê
      expedîvit.
  Namque ârida sarmenta in boum cornibus dêligâta[6] prîncipiô[7]
  noctis incendî bovêsque ad montês, quôs Rômânî însêderant, agî
  iussit. Quî cum accênsîs cornibus per montês, per silvâs hûc      {35}
  illûc discurrerent, Rômânî mîrâculô attonitî cônstitêrunt; ipse
  Fabius, însidiâs esse ratus,[8] mîlitem extrâ vâllum êgredî vetuit.
  Intereâ Hannibal ex angustiîs êvâsit.

  Dein Hannibal, ut Fabiô apud suôs cônflâret invidiam, agrum       {39}
  êius, omnibus circâ vâstâtîs, intâctum relîquit. At Fabius, missô
  Rômam Quîntô fîliô, inviolâtum ab hoste agrum vêndidit êiusque
  pretiô captîvôs Rômânôs redêmit.

  Haud grâta tamen Rômânîs erat Fabiî cunctâtiô: eumque prô
  cautô timidum, prô cunctâtôre sêgnem[9] vocitâbant. Augêbat
  invidiam Minucius, magister[10] equitum, dictâtôrem crîminandô:   {45}
  illum in dûcendô bellô sêdulô tempus terere,[11] quô diûtius in
  magistrâtû esset sôlusque et Rômae et in exercitû imperium
  habêret. Hîs sermônibus accênsa plêbs dictâtôrî[12] magistrum
    [[46]]
  equitum imperiô[1] aequâvit. Hanc iniûriam aequô[2] animô tulit
  Fabius exercitumque suum cum Minuciô dîvîsit. Cum autem           {50}
  Minucius temerê proelium commîsisset, eî[3] perîclitantî auxiliô
  vênit Fabius. Cûius subitô adventû repressus Hannibal receptuî[4]
  cecinit, palam cônfessus[5] ab sê Minucium, sê â Fabiô victum esse.
  Redeuntem ex aciê dîxisse eum[6] ferunt tandem[7] eam nûbem, quae
  sedêre in iugîs montium solita esset, cum procellâ imbrem dedisse.
  Minucius autem perîculô lîberâtus castra cum Fabiô iûnxit et      {56}
  patrem eum appellâvit idemque facere mîlitês iussit.

  Posteâ Hannibal Tarentô[8] per prôditiônem potîtus est. Hanc
  urbem ut Poenîs trâderent, tredecim ferê nôbilês iuvenês Tarentînî
  coniûrâverant. Hî, nocte per[9] speciem vênandî urbe êgressî,     {60}
  ad Hannibalem, quî haud procul castra habêbat, vênêrunt. Cuî
  cum quid parârent exposuissent, conlaudâvit eôs Hannibal monuitque
  ut[10] redeuntês pecora Carthâginiênsium, quae pâstum[11] prôpulsa
  essent, ad urbem agerent[10] et velutî[12] praedam ex hoste
  factam aut praefectô aut cûstôdibus portârum dônârent.[10] Id     {65}
  iterum ac saepius ab iîs factum eôque[13] cônsuêtûdinis adducta rês
  est, ut, quôcumque noctis tempore sîbilô dedissent[14] sîgnum, porta
  urbis aperîrêtur. Tunc Hannibal eôs nocte mediâ cum decem
  mîlibus hominum dêlêctôrum secûtus est. Ubi portae appropinquârunt,
    [[47]]
  nôta iuvenum vôx et familiâre sîgnum vigilem excitâvit.           {70}
  Duo prîmî înferêbant aprum vâstî corporis. Vigil incautus, dum
  bêluae mâgnitûdinem mîrâtur, vênâbulô occîsus est. Ingressî
  prôditôrês cêterôs vigilês sôpîtôs[1] obtruncant. Tum Hannibal
  cum suô âgmine ingreditur: Rômânî passim trucîdantur. Lîvius
  Salînâtor, Rômânôrum praefectus, cum iîs, quî caedî superfuêrunt,
  in arcem cônfûgit.                                                {76}

  Profectus igitur Fabius ad recipiendum Tarentum urbem obsidiône
  cinxit. Leve[2] dictû mômentum ad rem ingentem perficiendam
  eum adiûvit. Praefectus praesidiî Tarentînî dêperîbat[3]
  amôre mulierculae,[4] cûius frâter in exercitû Fabiî erat. Mîles  {80}
  iussus â Fabiô prô perfugâ Tarentum trânsiit ac per sorôrem
  praefectum ad[5] trâdendam urbem perpulit. Fabius vigiliâ[6] prîmâ
  accessit ad eam partem mûrî, quam praefectus cûstôdiêbat. Adiuvantibus
  recipientibusque êius mîlitibus, Rômânî in urbem trânscendêrunt.
  Inde, proximâ portâ refrâctâ,[7] Fabius cum exercitû              {85}
  intrâvit. Hannibal[8] nûntiâtâ Tarentî oppûgnâtiône, cum ad opem
  ferendam fêstînâns captam urbem esse audîvisset, "Et Rômânî"
  inquit "suum[9] Hannibalem habent: eâdem, quâ cêperâmus, arte
  Tarentum âmîsimus."

  Cum posteâ Lîvius Salînâtor côram Fabiô glôriârêtur, quod[10]     {90}
  arcem Tarentînam retinuisset,[10] dîxissetque eum[11] suâ operâ
  Tarentum recêpisse, "Certê" inquit Fabius rîdêns, "nam nisi tû
  âmîsissês,[12] ego numquam recêpissem."[12]

  Quîntus Fabius iam senex fîliô suô cônsulî lêgâtus fuit; cumque
    [[48]]
  in êius castra venîret, fîlius obviam patrî prôgressus est,       {95}
  duodecim lîctôribus prô môre antecêdentibus. Equô[1] vehêbâtur
  senex neque appropinquante cônsule dêscendit. Iam ex lîctôribus
  ûndecim verêcundiâ[2] paternae mâiestâtis tacitî praeterierant.
  Quod cum cônsul animadvertisset, proximum lîctôrem iussit
  inclâmâre[3] Fabiô patrî ut ex equô dêscenderet. Pater tum       {100}
  dêsiliêns "Nôn ego, fîlî," inquit "tuum imperium contempsî, sed
  experîrî voluî num scîrês cônsulem tê esse." Ad summam senectûtem
  vîxit Fabius Mâximus, dîgnus tantô côgnômine.[4] Cautior[5]
  quam prômptior habitus est, sed însita[6] êius ingeniô prûdentia eî
  bellô, quod tum gerêbâtur, propriê apta erat. Nêminî[7] dubium   {105}
  est quîn[8] rem[9] Rômânam cunctandô[10] restituerit. Ut Scîpiô
  pûgnandô,[10] ita hîc nôn dîmicandô[10] mâximê cîvitâtî Rômânae
  succurrisse vîsus est. Alter enim celeritâte suâ Carthâginem
  oppressit, alter cunctâtiône id[11] êgit, nê Rôma opprimî posset.

    [Footnotes: XIX (pages 43-48)

    43.10: In the latter part of the First Punic War Hamilcar had
    successfully maintained himself for several years in Sicily
    against the Romans. Subsequently he built up a great Carthaginian
    empire in Spain, partly to offset the losses which Carthage had
    sustained in its struggle with Rome, and partly to supply it with
    the means for a renewal of the conflict.
    43.11: #novem . . . nâtus#: 'when only nine years old.'
    43.12: Cf. p. 10, n. 15.
    43.13: This war lasted from 218 to 202 B.C.
    44.1: When Hamilcar was killed in battle in Spain in 227, his
    son-in-law Hasdrubal took command of the Carthaginian forces
    there. He in turn was succeeded by Hannibal in 219.
    44.2: dat. with #foederâtam#. Cf. H 428, 3 (385, 4, 3): A 248,
    _a_, R.: G 359: B 192, 1. Compare the dat. used with _iungô_ and
    _mîsceô_.
    44.3: #utrum# is here a relative pronoun; hence the indicative
    #placet#, with which we must supply _vôbîs_. In #utrum vellet#,
    however, #utrum# is interrogative: hence the subjunctive.
    44.4: = a subjunctive in ind. disc. representing an original
    imperative. See p. xxvi, M 6.
    44.5: _excutiô_.
    44.6: #quibus . . . animîs, iîsdem#: abl. of manner. See p. 42,
    n. 5.
    44.7: Sc. _bellum_.
    44.8: P. Cornelius Scipio, father of the famous P. Cornelius
    Scipio Africanus Maior, and consul in 218.
    44.9: The first two battles were fought in 218, the third in 217.
    44.10: See Vocab., _dictâtor_.
    44.11: Cf. p. 28, n. 17.
    44.12: #adversus Hannibalem# = a causal clause: 'since he was
    facing H.' Here again the Latin feels the lack of a participle to
    _sum_.
    44.13: #recêdere . . . discrîmine#: 'to avoid (any) hazardous
    risk.' #recêdere# depends on #cônstituit#, l. 22.
    44.14: #modicô . . . intervâllô#: we say, 'at a moderate
    distance.' For the abl., see p. 39, n. 12.
    44.15: 'let slip,' 'lose sight of.'
    45.1: apparently = _in castrîs_, but really an abl. of means.
    45.2: #nisi . . . côgeret#: 'except as far as necessity forced
    (Fabius to lead them forth).' #côgeret# is an example of the
    iterative subjunctive, used to denote the frequent repetition of
    an act. It generally occurs in clauses containing a past tense,
    and is common in Livy, on whom this story is based.
    45.3: #neque . . . deerat#: 'missed no chance of scoring a
    success.'
    45.4: #reî bene gerendae#: cf. p. 40, n. 17.
    45.5: #mîlitem . . . paenitêre#: 'the soldiers began to be less
    discontented with (i.e. to be more confident of),' etc. For the
    construction, see p. 28, n. 7.
    45.6: #dêligâta . . . incendî# = _dêligârî et incendî_.
    45.7: Why abl.?
    45.8: _reor_.
    45.9: Render by a noun: 'sluggard.'
    45.10: See Vocab., _magister_.
    45.11: indirect discourse, dependent on the verb of saying
    suggested by #crîminandô#.
    45.12: Indirect object with #aequâvit#, which = _aequum fêcit_.
    46.1: #abl.# of specification.
    46.2: #aequô animô# is an abl. of manner (p. 41, n. 10), and =
    'patiently.'
    46.3: #eî . . . auxiliô#: 'to help him in his peril.' Cf. p. 25,
    n. 6.
    46.4: #receptuî cecinit#: 'gave the signal for a retreat.'
    #receptuî# is a dat. of purpose: cf. p. 25, n. 6. _canere_ is used
    of instrumental music (here of playing on the trumpet) as well as
    of vocal.
    46.5: _cônfiteor_.
    46.6: i.e. Hannibal.
    46.7: #tandem . . . dedisse#: 'the cloud . . . had at last brought
    wind and rain,' i.e. Fabius, after so long threatening the
    Carthaginians, had at last proceeded to active measures.
    46.8: Cf. p. 4, n. 6.
    46.9: #per . . . vênandî#: 'under pretense of hunting.'
    46.10: a substantive clause of purpose, object of #monuit#.
    46.11: supine of _pâscô_, denoting the purpose of #prôpulsa
    essent#: cf. p. 5, n. 20.
    46.12: _veluti . . . factam_: 'as if they (i.e. the cattle) were
    plunder captured from the foe.' #praedam# is accus. by attraction
    to _ea pecora_, to be supplied as the object of dônârent.
    46.13: #eô . . . est#: lit., 'to such a degree of custom was the
    matter brought,' = 'so customary did this proceeding become.'
    #cônsuêtûdinis# is a partitive gen. with #eô#, which strictly =
    'thither, to that point.'
    46.14: subjunctive by attraction (p. 13, n. 10) to #aperîrêtur#,
    which itself denotes result.
    47.1: 'who were buried in slumber.' The perf. pass. part. here, as
    often, = a relative clause.
    47.2: #Leve . . . mômentum#: 'a circumstance (almost too) trifling
    to mention.' For #dictû#, see p. 19, n. 15.
    47.3: #dêperîbat amôre#: 'was dying for (lit. because of) love,'
    i.e. was desperately in love with.
    47.4: objective gen. with #amôre#: cf. p. 14, n. 15.
    47.5: #ad . . . perpulit# (_perpellô_): 'drove him to,' i.e.
    induced him to, etc.
    47.6: '#watch.#'
    47.7: _refringô_.
    47.8: emphatic by reason of its position before the conjunction
    #cum#: cf. p. 19, n. 8.
    47.9: #suum Hannibalem#: 'a Hannibal of their own.'
    47.10: Cf. p. 14, n. 1.
    47.11: i.e. Fabius. Livius said: _meâ operâ tû Tarentum
    recêpistî_.
    47.12: A conditional sentence, containing a supposition contrary
    to the facts: H 579 and N. (510 and N. 1): M 938: A 308: G 597:
    B 304.
    48.1: #equô vehêbâtur#: 'was riding.' #equô# is an abl. of means.
    48.2: #verêcundiâ . . . mâiestâtis#: 'out of respect for his
    dignity as a father.' Explain the case of #verêcundiâ#, also of
    #mâiestâtis#. Roman fathers were as absolutely masters of their
    children as they were of their slaves. Yet the rights of a son in
    official position took precedence of the honors due a father.
    48.3: Cf. p. 12, n. 3.
    48.4: abl. with #dîgnus#: H 481 (421, III): M 654: A 245, _a_:
    G 397, N. 2: B 226, 2.
    48.5: #Cautior . . . est#: = 'he was accounted cautious rather
    than alert.' See H 499 (444, 2): M 429: A 192: G 299: B 240, 4.
    48.6: #însita . . . prûdentia#: 'his innate caution'; lit., the
    caution implanted in his nature. For _ingeniô_, see p. 2, n. 7.
    48.7: possessive dative: 'no one has a doubt.'
    48.8: Cf. p. 39, n. 4.
    48.9: = _rem pûblicam_.
    48.10: abl. of means. With #cunctandô# cf. _morâ_, l. 19, and
    _cunctâtiône_, l. 109.
    48.11: #id . . . posset#: 'accomplished this, that it should be
    impossible to overthrow Rome.' #nê . . . posset# is a clause of
    purpose, in apposition with #id#.]


#XX. Aemilius Paulus et Terentius Varro# [[stripped text]]

Hannibal in Apuliam pervenerat. Adversus eum Roma profecti sunt duo
consules, Aemilius Paulus et Terentius Varro. Paulo Fabii cunctatio
magis placebat; Varro autem, ferox et temerarius, acriora sequebatur
consilia. Ambo consules ad vicum, qui Cannae appellabatur, castra
communiverunt. Ibi deinde Varro, invito conlega, aciem instruxit et
signum pugnae dedit. Hannibal autem ita constituerat aciem, ut Romanis
et solis radii et ventus ab oriente pulverem adflans adversi essent.
Victus caesusque est Romanus exercitus; nusquam graviore vulnere
adflicta est res publica. Aemilius Paulus telis obrutus cecidit: quem
cum media in pugna sedentem in saxo oppletum cruore conspexisset quidam
tribunus militum, "Cape" inquit "hunc equum et fuge, Aemili. Etiam sine
tua morte lacrimarum satis luctusque est." Ad ea consul: "Tu quidem
macte virtute esto! Sed cave exiguum tempus e manibus hostium evadendi
perdas! Abi, nuntia patribus ut urbem muniant ac prius quam hostis
victor adveniat, praesidiis firment. Me in hac strage meorum militum
patere exspirare." Alter consul cum paucis equitibus Venusiam perfugit.
Consulares aut praetorii occiderunt viginti, senatores capti aut occisi
triginta, nobiles viri trecenti, militum quadraginta milia, equitum tria
milia et quingenti. Hannibal in testimonium victoriae suae tres modios
aureorum anulorum Carthaginem misit, quos de manibus equitum Romanorum
et senatorum detraxerat.

Hannibali victori cum ceteri gratularentur suaderentque ut quietem iam
ipse sumeret et fessis militibus daret, unus ex eius praefectis,
Maharbal, minime cessandum ratus, Hannibalem hortabatur ut statim Romam
pergeret, die quinto victor in Capitolio epulaturus. Cumque Hannibal
illud non probasset, Maharbal "Non omnia nimirum" inquit "eidem dii
dedere. Vincere scis, Hannibal; victoria uti nescis." Mora huius diei
satis creditur saluti fuisse urbi et imperio. Hannibal cum victoria
posset uti, frui maluit, relictaque Roma in Campaniam divertit, cuius
deliciis mox exercitus ardor elanguit, adeo ut vere dictum sit Capuam
Hannibali Cannas fuisse.

Numquam tantum pavoris Romae fuit, quantum ubi acceptae cladis nuntius
advenit. Neque tamen ulla pacis mentio facta est; quin etiam animo
civitas adeo magno fuit, ut Varroni ex tanta clade redeunti obviam irent
et gratias agerent, quod de re publica non desperasset: qui, si Poenorum
dux fuisset, temeritatis poenas omni supplicio dedisset. Non autem vitae
cupiditate, sed rei publicae amore se superfuisse reliquo aetatis suae
tempore approbavit. Nam et barbam capillumque submisit, et postea
numquam recubans cibum cepit; honoribus quoque, cum ei deferrentur a
populo, renuntiavit, dicens felicioribus magistratibus rei publicae opus
esse. Dum igitur Hannibal segniter et otiose agebat. Romani interim
respirare coeperunt. Arma non erant: detracta sunt templis vetera
hostium spolia. Deerat iuventus: servi manumissi et armati sunt. Egebat
aerarium: opes suas libens senatus in medium protulit, nec praeter quod
in bullis singulisque anulis erat quidquam sibi auri reliquerunt. Patrum
exemplum secuti sunt equites imitataeque equites omnes tribus. Denique
vix suffecere tabulae, vix scribarum manus, cum omnes privatae opes in
publicum deferrentur.

Cum Hannibal redimendi sui copiam captivis Romanis fecisset, decem ex
ipsis Romam ea de re missi sunt; nec pignus aliud fidei ab iis
postulatum est, quam ut iurarent se, si non impetrassent, in castra esse
redituros. Eos senatus non redimendos censuit responditque eos cives non
esse necessarios, qui, cum armati essent, capi potuissent. Ûnus ex iis
legatis e castris Poenorum egressus, veluti aliquid oblitus, paulo post
in castra erat regressus, deinde comites ante noctem adsecutus erat. Is
ergo, re non impetrata, domum abiit; reditu enim in castra se liberatum
esse iureiurando interpretabatur. Quod ubi innotuit, iussit senatus
illum comprehendi et vinctum duci ad Hannibalem. Ea res Hannibalis
audaciam maxime fregit, quod senatus populusque Romanus rebus adflictis
tam excelso esset animo.


  #XX. Aemilius Paulus et Terentius Varrô# [[as printed]]

  [Sidenote: B.C. 216.]

  Hannibal[12] in Âpûliam pervênerat. Adversus eum Rômâ
  profectî sunt duo cônsulês, Aemilius Paulus et Terentius
    [[49]]
  Varrô. Paulô Fabiî cunctâtiô magis placêbat; Varrô[1] autem, ferôx
  et temerârius, âcriôra sequêbâtur cônsilia. Ambô cônsulês ad
  vîcum, quî Cannae appellâbâtur, castra commûnîvêrunt. Ibi          {5}
  deinde Varrô, invîtô[2] conlêgâ, aciem înstrûxit et sîgnum pûgnae
  dedit. Hannibal autem ita cônstituerat aciem, ut Rômânîs[3] et
  sôlis radiî et ventus ab oriente pulverem adflâns adversî
  essent. Victus caesusque est Rômânus exercitus; nûsquam graviôre
  vulnere adflîcta est rês pûblica. Aemilius Paulus têlîs obrutus   {10}
  cecidit: quem cum mediâ in pûgnâ sedentem in saxô opplêtum cruôre
  cônspexisset quîdam tribûnus mîlitum, "Cape" inquit "hunc
  equum et fuge, Aemilî.[4] Etiam sine tuâ morte lacrimârum satis
  lûctûsque est." Ad ea cônsul[5]: "Tû[6] quidem macte virtûte
  estô! Sed cavê[7] exiguum tempus ê manibus hostium êvâdendî       {15}
  perdâs! Abî, nûntiâ patribus ut urbem mûniant ac prius quam
  hostis victor adveniat, praesidiîs fîrment. Mê in hâc strâge meôrum
  mîlitum patere[8] exspîrâre." Alter cônsul cum paucîs equitibus
  Venusiam perfûgit. Cônsulârês aut praetôriî occidêrunt
  vîgintî, senâtôrês captî aut occîsî trîgintâ, nôbilês             {20}
  virî trecentî, mîlitum quadrâgintâ mîlia, equitum
  tria mîlia et quîngentî. Hannibal in[9] têstimônium
  victôriae suae três modiôs aureôrum ânulôrum[10]
  Carthâginem mîsit, quôs dê manibus
  equitum Rômânôrum et senâtôrum dêtrâxerat.                        {25}

    [Illustration: ÂNULUS]

    [[50]]
  Hannibalî victôrî cum cêterî grâtulârentur suâdêrentque ut
  quiêtem iam ipse sûmeret et fessîs mîlitibus daret, ûnus ex êius
  praefectîs, Maharbal, minimê[1] cessandum ratus, Hannibalem
  hortâbâtur ut statim Rômam pergeret, diê quîntô victor in
  Capitôliô epulâtûrus.[2] Cumque Hannibal illud nôn probâsset,     {30}
  Maharbal "Nôn omnia nîmîrum" inquit "eîdem[3] diî dedêre.
  Vincere scîs, Hannibal; victôriâ ûtî nescîs." Mora hûius diêî satis
  crêditur salûtî[4] fuisse urbî[4] et imperiô.[4] Hannibal cum victôriâ
  posset ûtî, fruî mâluit, relîctâque Rômâ in Campâniam dîvertit,
  cûius[5] dêliciîs mox exercitûs ârdor êlanguit, adeô ut vêrê dictum
  sit Capuam[6] Hannibalî Cannâs fuisse.                            {36}

  Numquam tantum pavôris Rômae fuit, quantum[7] ubi acceptae
  clâdis nûntius advênit. Neque tamen ûlla pâcis mentiô facta est;
  quîn[8] etiam animô cîvitâs adeô mâgnô fuit, ut Varrônî ex tantâ  {39}
  clâde redeuntî obviam îrent et grâtiâs agerent, quod dê rê pûblicâ
  nôn dêspêrâsset: quî, sî Poenôrum dux fuisset,[9] temeritâtis poenâs
  omnî suppliciô dedisset.[9] Nôn autem vîtae cupiditâte, sed reî
  pûblicae amôre sê superfuisse[10] reliquô aetâtis suae tempore
  approbâvit. Nam et barbam capillumque submîsit,[11] et posteâ numquam
  recubâns[12] cibum cêpit; honôribus quoque, cum eî dêferrentur â  {45}
    [[51]]
  populô, renûntiâvit, dîcêns fêlîciôribus magistrâtibus[1] reî pûblicae
  opus esse. Dum igitur Hannibal sêgniter et ôtiôsê agêbat.
  Rômânî interim respîrâre[2]
  coepêrunt. Arma nôn
  erant: dêtrâcta sunt                                              {50}
  templîs[3] vetera hostium
  spolia. Deerat iuventûs:
  servî manûmissî et armâtî
  sunt. Egêbat aerârium:
  opês suâs libêns senâtus in medium prôtulit, nec praeter quod in  {55}
  bullîs singulîsque[4] ânulîs erat quidquam sibi aurî relîquêrunt.
  Patrum exemplum secûtî sunt equitês imitâtaeque equitês omnês
  tribûs. Dênique vix[5] suffêcêre tabulae, vix scrîbârum manûs, cum
  omnês prîvâtae opês in pûblicum dêferrentur.

    [Illustration: CONVÎVIUM]

  Cum Hannibal redimendî[6] suî côpiam captîvîs Rômânîs fêcisset,   {60}
  decem ex ipsîs Rômam eâ dê rê missî sunt; nec pîgnus aliud
  fideî ab iîs pôstulâtum est, quam ut iûrârent sê, sî nôn impetrâssent,
  in castra esse reditûrôs. Eôs senâtus nôn redimendôs cênsuit
  responditque eôs cîvês nôn esse necessâriôs, quî, cum armâtî
  essent, capî potuissent. Ûnus ex iîs lêgâtîs ê castrîs Poenôrum   {65}
  êgressus, velutî[7] aliquid[8] oblîtus, paulô post in castra erat
  regressus, deinde comitês ante noctem adsecûtus erat. Is ergô, rê
  nôn impetrâtâ, domum abiit; reditû enim in castra sê lîberâtum
  esse iûreiûrandô interpretâbâtur.[9] Quod ubi innôtuit, iussit senâtus
    [[52]]
  illum comprehendî et vinctum dûcî ad Hannibalem. Ea rês           {70}
  Hannibalis audâciam mâximê frêgit, quod senâtus populusque
  Rômânus rêbus[1] adflîctîs tam excelsô esset animô.

    [Footnotes: XX (pages 48-52)

    48.12: Since the battle at Lake Trasumenus (XIX, 17), there had
    been no general engagement between the Romans and Hannibal. The
    latter, closely watched and followed by Fabius, had marched into
    southern Italy, hoping to induce the peoples there to desert Rome
    and join him. When Fabius resigned the dictatorship at the end of
    the legal period, C. Terentius Varro and L. Aemilius Paulus were
    elected consuls. Their army numbered 80,000 men, and their
    instructions were to fight as speedily as possible.
    49.1: A further cause of trouble between the consuls was the fact
    that Paulus was a patrician, Varro a plebeian.
    49.2: #invîtô conlêgâ#: abl. abs.: 'though opposed by his
    colleague.' How literally? The consuls held supreme command on
    alternate days.
    49.3: Construe with #adversî#.
    49.4: H 83, 5 (51, 5): M 152: A 40, _c_: G 33, 2: B 25, 1.
    49.5: sc. _inquit_.
    49.6: #Tû . . . estô#: 'God bless you!' Cf. p. 32, n. 1.
    49.7: #cavê . . . perdâs# = _cavê nê . . . perdâs_: 'Take care
    lest,' etc. For this form see H 561, 2 (489, 2): M 715: A 269,
    _a_, 3: G 271, 2: B 276, _c_. We really have two commands here
    side by side, thus: 'Take care'; 'Don't waste,' etc.
    49.8: imperative of _patior_.
    49.9: #in . . . suae#: 'to prove his victory.'
    49.10: The custom of wearing rings was universal among the Romans,
    having arisen out of their use as signets. Originally they were of
    iron. When gold rings were first used they served to distinguish
    the higher classes.
    50.1: #minimê . . . ratus#: 'thinking that there ought to be no
    delay.' With #cessandum# sc. _esse_, and see p. 16, n. 8.
    50.2: #victor . . . epulâtûrus#: 'for he would surely dine as
    victor on the Capitol.' The fut. part. is often thus used to
    denote the certain occurrence of a future event. Further, the
    clause expresses the reason why Maharbal urged H. to proceed to
    Rome. What were Maharbal's exact words?
    50.3: dat. sing.
    50.4: Cf. p. 25, n. 6. Contrast the words of a modern historian:
    "Hannibal knew Rome better than the simpletons who, in ancient and
    modern times, have fancied that he might have terminated the
    struggle by a march on the enemy's capital."
    50.5: #cûius . . . fuisse#: a gross exaggeration. Hannibal
    successfully maintained himself in Italy till recalled in 203.
    50.6: Capua, at this time the most powerful city in Italy next to
    Rome, had formed an alliance with Hannibal after the battle of
    Cannae.
    50.7: Sc. _fuit._
    50.8: #quîn etiam#: 'on the contrary.'
    50.9: For the construction, see p. 47, n. 12. For the fact, cf.
    XVI, 19 ff.
    50.10: #superfuisse . . . approbâvit#: 'he showed that he had
    effected his escape (lit., had survived).'
    50.11: 'let grow.' This manner of showing grief is often
    mentioned.
    50.12: The Romans reclined on the left side at meals. Varro's act
    was a kind of penance, since it indicated that he denied himself
    the pleasures of the table.
    51.1: #magistrâtibus . . . esse#: cf. p. 37, notes 3 and 4.
    51.2: 'to repair their losses'; lit., 'to get their breath again.'
    51.3: dat.; cf. p. 2, n. 7. After a victory, captured arms, as
    well as a portion of the captured treasure, were hung up in some
    temple as a thank-offering to the gods.
    51.4: #singulîs . . . ânulîs#: 'a ring apiece.'
    51.5: #vix . . . manûs#: i.e. they hardly had clerks and tablets
    sufficient to keep the record of contributions.
    51.6: #redimendî suî#: 'of ransoming themselves.' H 626, 3 (542,
    #I#, N. 1): M 1000: A 298, _a_: G 428, R. 1: B 339, 5.
    51.7: #velutî . . . oblîtus#: 'pretending to have forgotten
    something.' How literally?
    51.8: A neuter pronoun or adjective is often used with verbs of
    remembering or forgetting. Contrast _oblîta frâtrum_, IV, 37, and
    note.
    51.9: 'maintained, held.'
    52.1: abl. abs.: 'though their affairs were at the lowest ebb.']


#XXI. Publius Cornelius Scipio Africanus# [[stripped text]]

Publius Cornelius Scipio nondum annos pueritiae egressus patrem
singulari virtute servavit; qui cum pugna apud Ticinum contra Hannibalem
commissa graviter vulneratus in hostium manus iam iam venturus esset,
filius interiecto corpore Poenis inruentibus se opposuit et patrem
periculo liberavit. Quae pietas Scipioni postea aedilitatem petenti
favorem populi conciliavit. Cum obsisterent tribuni plebis, negantes
rationem eius esse habendam, quod nondum ad petendum legitima aetas
esset, "Si me" inquit Scipio "omnes Quirites aedilem facere volunt,
satis annorum habeo." Tanto inde favore ad suffragia itum est, ut
tribuni incepto desisterent.

Post cladem Cannensem Romani exercitus reliquiae Canusium perfugerant;
cumque ibi tribuni militum quattuor essent, tamen omnium consensu ad
Publium Scipionem, admodum adulescentem, summa imperii delata est.
Quibus consultantibus nuntiat Publius Furius Philus, consularis viri
filius, nobiles quosdam iuvenes propter desperationem consilium de
Italia deserenda inire. Statim in hospitium Metelli, qui conspirationis
erat princeps, se contulit Scipio, et cum concilium ibi iuvenum, de
quibus adlatum erat, invenisset, stricto super capita consultantium
gladio, "Iurate" inquit "vos neque ipsos rem publicam populi Romani
deserturos, neque alium civem Romanum deserere passuros: qui non
iuraverit, in se hunc gladium strictum esse sciat." Haud secus pavidi,
quam si victorem Hannibalem cernerent, iurant omnes custodiendosque
semet ipsos Scipioni tradunt.

Cum Romani duas clades in Hispania accepissent duoque ibi summi
imperatores intra dies triginta cecidissent, placuit exercitum augeri
eoque proconsulem mitti; nec tamen quem mitterent satis constabat. Ea de
re indicta sunt comitia. Primo populus exspectabat ut, qui se tanto
dignos imperio crederent, nomina profiterentur; sed nemo audebat illud
imperium suscipere. Maesta igitur civitas ac prope inops consilii
comitiorum die in campum descendit. Subito P. Cornelius Scipio, quattuor
et viginti ferme annos natus, professus se petere, in superiore, unde
conspici posset, loco constitit. In quem postquam omnium ora conversa
sunt, ad unum omnes Scipionem in Hispania proconsulem esse iusserunt. At
postquam animorum impetus resedit, populum Romanum coepit facti
paenitere: aetati Scipionis maxime diffidebant. Quod ubi animadvertit
Scipio, advocata contione ita magno elatoque animo de bello, quod
gerendum esset, disseruit, ut homines cura liberaret speque certissima
impleret.

Profectus igitur in Hispaniam Scipio Carthaginem Novam, quo die venit,
expugnavit. Eo congestae erant omnes paene Africae et Hispaniae opes,
ibi arma, ibi pecunia, ibi totius Hispaniae obsides erant: quibus
omnibus potitus est Scipio. Inter captivos ad eum adducta est eximiae
formae adulta virgo. Quam ubi comperit inlustri loco inter Celtiberos
natam principique eius gentis adulescenti desponsam esse, arcessitis
parentibus et sponso eam reddidit. Parentes virginis, qui ad eam
redimendam satis magnum auri pondus attulerant, Scipionem orabant ut id
a se donum acciperet. Scipio aurum ante pedes poni iussit vocatoque ad
se virginis sponso, "Super dotem" inquit "quam accepturus a socero es,
haec tibi a me dotalia dona accedent" aurumque tollere ac sibi habere
iussit. Ille domum reversus ad referendam Scipioni gratiam Celtiberos
Romanis conciliavit.

Deinde Scipio Hasdrubalem victum ex Hispania expulit. Castris hostium
potitus omnem praedam militibus concessit, captivos Hispanos sine pretio
domum dimisit; Afros vero vendi iussit. Erat inter eos puer adultus
regii generis, forma insigni: quem cum percontaretur Scipio quis et
cuias esset, et cur id aetatis in castris fuisset, "Numida sum" inquit
puer, "Massivam populares vocant: orbus a patre relictus, apud avum
maternum, Numidiae regem, educatus sum. Cum avunculo Masinissa, qui
nuper subsidio Carthaginiensibus venit, in Hispaniam traieci; prohibitus
propter aetatem a Masinissa numquam ante proelium inii. Eo die, quo
pugnatum est cum Romanis, inscio avunculo, clam armis equoque sumpto, in
aciem exii: ibi, prolapso equo, captus sum a Romanis." Scipio eum
interrogat velletne ad avunculum reverti. Cum, effusis gaudio lacrimis,
id vero se cupere puer diceret, tum Scipio puero anulum aureum equumque
ornatum donat datisque qui tuto deducerent equitibus dimisit.

Cum Publius Cornelius Scipio se erga Hispanos clementer gessisset,
circumfusa multitudo eum regem ingenti consensu appellavit; at Scipio,
silentio per praeconem facto, "Nomen imperatoris" inquit, "quo me mei
milites appellarunt, mihi maximum est: regium nomen, alibi magnum, Romae
intolerabile est. Si id amplissimum iudicatis, quod regale est, vobis
licet existimare regalem in me esse animum; sed oro vos ut a regis
appellatione abstineatis." Sensere etiam barbari magnitudinem animi, qua
Scipio id aspernabatur, quod ceteri mortales admirantur et concupiscunt.

Scipio recepta Hispania cum iam bellum in ipsam Africam transferre
meditaretur, conciliandos prius regum et gentium animos existimavit.
Syphacem, Maurorum regem, opulentissimum totius Africae regem, quem
magno usui sibi fore speraret, primum tentare statuit. Itaque legatum
cum donis ad eum misit C. Laelium, quocum intima familiaritate vivebat.
Syphax amicitiam Romanorum se accipere adnuit, sed fidem nec dare nec
accipere, nisi cum ipso coram duce Romano, voluit. Scipio igitur in
Africam traiecit. Forte ita incidit, ut eo ipso tempore Hasdrubal pulsus
Hispania ad eundem portum appelleret, Syphacis amicitiam pariter
petiturus. Uterque a rege in hospitium invitatus. Cenatum simul apud
regem est; eodem etiam lecto Scipio atque Hasdrubal accubuerunt. Tanta
autem inerat comitas in Scipione, ut non Syphacem modo, sed etiam hostem
infestissimum Hasdrubalem sibi conciliaret. Scipio, foedere icto cum
Syphace, in Hispaniam ad exercitum rediit.

Masinissa quoque amicitiam cum Scipione iungere iam dudum cupiebat.
Quare ad eum tres Numidarum principes misit ad tempus locumque conloquio
statuendum. Duos pro obsidibus retineri a Scipione iubet; remisso
tertio, qui Masinissam ad locum constitutum adduceret, Scipio et
Masinissa cum paucis in conloquium venerunt. Ceperat iam ante Numidam ex
fama rerum gestarum admiratio viri, sed maior praesentis veneratio
cepit: erat enim in vultu maiestas summa; accedebat promissa caesaries
habitusque corporis, non cultus munditiis, sed virilis vere ac
militaris, et florens iuventa. Prope attonitus ipso congressu Numida
gratias de filio fratris remisso agit: adfirmat se ex eo tempore eam
quaesivisse occasionem, quam tandem oblatam non omiserit; cupere se illi
et populo Romano operam navare. Laetus eum Scipio audivit atque in
societatem recepit.

Scipio deinde Romam rediit et ante annos consul factus est. Sicilia ei
provincia decreta est permissumque ut in Africam inde traiceret. Qui cum
vellet ex fortissimis peditibus Romanis trecentorum equitum numerum
complere, nec posset illos subito armis et equis instruere, id prudenti
consilio perfecit. Namque ex omni Sicilia trecentos iuvenes nobilissimos
et ditissimos, qui equis militarent et secum in Africam traicerent,
legit diemque iis edixit, qua equis armisque instructi atque ornati
adessent. Gravis ea militia, procul domo, terra marique multos labores,
magna pericula adlatura videbatur; neque ipsos modo, sed parentes
cognatosque eorum ea cura angebat. Ubi dies quae dicta erat advenit,
arma equosque ostenderunt, sed omnes fere longinquum et grave bellum
horrere apparebat. Tunc Scipio militiam iis se remissurum ait, si arma
et equos militibus Romanis voluissent tradere. Laeti condicionem
acceperunt iuvenes Siculi. Ita Scipio sine publica impensa suos
instruxit ornavitque equites.

Tunc Scipio ex Sicilia in Africam vento secundo profectus est tanto
militum ardore, ut non ad bellum duci viderentur, sed ad certa victoriae
praemia. Celeriter naves e conspectu Siciliae ablatae sunt conspectaque
brevi Africae litora. Scipio cum egrediens ad terram navi prolapsus
esset et ob hoc attonitos milites cerneret, id, quod trepidationem
adferebat, in hortationem convertens, "Africam oppressi" inquit,
"milites!" Expositis copiis in proximis tumulis castra metatus est. Ibi
speculatores hostium in castris deprehensos et ad se perductos nec
supplicio adfecit nec de consiliis ac viribus Poenorum percontatus est,
sed circa omnes Romani exercitus manipulos curavit deducendos; dein
interrogatos num ea satis considerassent, quae speculari erant iussi,
prandio dato incolumes dimisit.

Scipioni in Africam advenienti Masinissa se coniunxit cum parva equitum
turma. Syphax vero a Romanis ad Poenos defecerat. Hasdrubal, Poenorum
dux, Syphaxque Scipioni se opposuerunt, qui utriusque castra una nocte
perrupit et incendit. Syphax ipse captus et vivus ad Scipionem
pertractus est. Syphacem in castra adduci cum esset nuntiatum, omnis
velut ad spectaculum triumphi multitudo effusa est; praecedebat ipse
vinctus, sequebatur grex nobilium Maurorum. Movebat omnes fortuna viri,
cuius amicitiam olim Scipio petierat. Regem aliosque captivos Romam
misit Scipio; Masinissam, qui egregie rem Romanam adiuverat, aurea
corona donavit.

Haec et aliae, quae sequebantur, clades Carthaginiensibus tantum
terroris intulerunt, ut Hannibalem ex Italia ad tuendam patriam
revocarent. Frendens gemensque ac vix lacrimis temperans is dicitur
legatorum verba audisse mandatisque paruisse. Respexit saepe Italiae
litora, semet accusans, quod non victorem exercitum statim ab Cannensi
pugna Romam duxisset. Zamam venerat Hannibal, quae urbs quinque dierum
iter a Carthagine abest, et nuntium ad Scipionem misit ut conloquendi
secum potestatem faceret. Scipio cum conloquium haud abnuisset, dies
locusque constituitur. Itaque congressi sunt duo clarissimi suae aetatis
duces. Steterunt aliquamdiu taciti mutuaque admiratione defixi. Cum vero
de condicionibus pacis inter eos non convenisset, ad suos se receperunt,
renuntiantes armis decernendum esse. Commisso deinde proelio Hannibal
victus cum quattuor equitibus fugit. Ceterum constat utrumque de altero
confessum esse nec melius instrui aciem nec acrius potuisse pugnari.

Carthaginienses metu perculsi ad petendam pacem oratores mittunt
triginta civitatis principes. Qui ubi in castra Romana venerunt, veniam
civitati petebant non culpam purgantes, sed initium culpae in Hannibalem
transferentes. Victis leges imposuit Scipio. Legati, cum nullas
condiciones recusarent, Romam profecti sunt, ut, quae a Scipione pacta
essent, ea patrum ac populi auctoritate confirmarentur. Ita pace terra
marique parta, Scipio exercitu in naves imposito Romam revertit. Ad quem
advenientem concursus ingens factus est; effusa non ex urbibus modo, sed
etiam ex agris multitudo viam obsidebat. Scipio inter gratulantium
plausus triumpho omnium clarissimo urbem est invectus primusque nomine
victae a se gentis est nobilitatus Africanusque appellatus.

Ex his rebus gestis virum eum esse virtutis divinae vulgo creditum est.
Id etiam dicere haud piget, quod scriptores de eo litteris mandaverunt,
Scipionem consuevisse, priusquam dilucesceret, in Capitolium ventitare
ac iubere aperiri cellam Iovis ibi solum diu demorari, quasi
consultantem de re publica cum Iove: aedituosque eius templi saepe esse
miratos, quod eum id temporis in Capitolium ingredientem canes, semper
in alios saevientes, non latrarent. Has vulgi de Scipione opiniones
confirmare atque approbare videbantur dicta factaque eius pleraque
admiranda, ex quibus est unum huiuscemodi. Adsidebat oppugnabatque
oppidum in Hispania, situ moenibusque ac defensoribus validum et
munitum, re etiam cibaria copiosum, neque ulla eius potiundi spes erat.
Quodam die ius in castris sedens dicebat Scipio atque ex eo loco id
oppidum procul videbatur. Tum e militibus, qui in iure apud eum stabant,
interrogavit quispiam ex more in quem diem locumque vades sisti iuberet.
Et Scipio manum ad ipsam oppidi, quod obsidebatur, arcem protendens,
"Perendie" inquit "sese sistant illo in loco," atque ita factum. Die
tertia, in quam vades sisti iusserat, oppidum captum est. Eodem die in
arce eius oppidi ius dixit.

Hannibal, a Scipione victus suisque invisus, ad Antiochum, Syriae regem,
confugit eumque hostem Romanis fecit. Missi sunt Roma legati ad
Antiochum, in quibus erat Scipio Africanus, qui cum Hannibale Ephesi
conlocutus ab eo quaesivit, quem fuisse maximum imperatorem crederet.
Respondit Hannibal Alexandrum, Macedonum regem, maximum sibi videri,
quod parva manu innumerabiles exercitus fudisset. Quaerenti deinde, quem
secundum poneret, "Pyrrhum" inquit, "quod primus castra metari docuit
nemoque illo elegantius loca cepit et praesidia deposuit." Sciscitanti
denique quem tertium duceret, semet ipsum dixit. Tum ridens Scipio
"Quidnam tu diceres" inquit "si me vicisses?" "Tum me vero" respondit
Hannibal "et ante Alexandrum et ante Pyrrhum et ante omnes alios
imperatores posuissem." Ita improviso adsentationis genere Scipionem e
grege imperatorum velut inaestimabilem secernebat.

Scipio ipse fertur quondam dixisse, cum eum quidam parum pugnacem
dicerent, "Imperatorem me mater, non bellatorem peperit." Idem dicere
solitus est non solum dandam esse viam fugientibus, sed etiam muniendam.

Decreto adversus Antiochum bello cum Syria provincia obvenisset Lucio
Scipioni, quia parum in eo putabatur esse animi, parum roboris, senatus
gerendi huius belli curam mandari volebat conlegae eius C. Laelio.
Surgens tunc Scipio Africanus, frater maior Lucii Scipionis, illam
familiae ignominiam deprecatus est: dixit in fratre suo summam esse
virtutem, summum consilium seque ei legatum fore promisit. Quod cum ab
eo esset dictum, nihil est de Lucii Scipionis provincia commutatum:
itaque frater natu maior minori legatus in Asiam profectus est et tam
diu eum consilio operaque adiuvit, donec triumphum ille et cognomen
Asiatici peperisset.

Eodem bello filius Scipionis Africani captus est et ad Antiochum
deductus. Benigne et liberaliter adulescentem rex habuit, quamquam ab
eius patre tum maxime finibus imperii pellebatur. Cum deinde pacem
Antiochus a Romanis peteret, legatus eius Publium Scipionem adiit eique
filium sine pretio redditurum regem dixit, si per eum pacem impetrasset.
Cui Scipio respondit "Abi, nuntia regi, me pro tanto munere gratias
agere; sed nunc aliam gratiam non possum referre, quam ut ei suadeam ut
bello absistat et pacis condicionem nullam recuset." Pax non convenit;
tamen Antiochus Scipioni filium remisit tantique viri maiestatem
venerari quam dolorem suum ulcisci maluit.

Victo Antiocho cum praedae ratio a L. Scipione reposceretur, Africanus
prolatum ab eo librum, quo acceptae et expensae summae continebantur et
refelli inimicorum accusatio poterat, discerpsit, indignatus de ea re
dubitari, quae sub ipso legato administrata esset. Quin etiam hunc in
modum verba fecit: "Non est quod quaeratis, patres conscripti, num
parvam pecuniam in aerarium rettulerim, qui antea illud Punico auro
repleverim, neque mea innocentia potest in dubium vocari. Cum Africam
totam potestati vestrae subiecerim, nihil ex ea praeter cognomen
rettuli. Non igitur me Punicae, non fratrem meum Asiaticae gazae avarum
reddiderunt; sed uterque nostrum invidia quam pecunia est locupletior."
Tam constantem defensionem Scipionis universus senatus comprobavit.

Deinde Scipioni Africano duo tribuni plebis diem dixerunt, quod praeda
ex Antiocho capta aerarium fraudasset. Ubi causae dicendae dies venit,
Scipio magna hominum frequentia in Forum est deductus. Iussus causam
dicere rostra conscendit et, corona triumphali capiti suo imposita, "Hoc
ego die" inquit "Hannibalem Poenum, imperio nostro inimicissimum, magno
proelio vici in terra Africa pacemque nobis et victoriam peperi
insperabilem. Ne igitur simus adversus deos ingrati, sed censeo
relinquamus nebulones hos eamusque nunc protinus in Capitolium Iovi
optimo maximo supplicatum." A rostris in Capitolium ascendit; simul se
universa contio ab accusatoribus avertit et secuta Scipionem est, nec
quisquam praeter praeconem, qui reum citabat, cum tribunis remansit.
Celebratior is dies favore hominum fuit, quam quo triumphans de Syphace
rege et Carthaginiensibus urbem est ingressus. Inde, ne amplius
tribuniciis iniuriis vexaretur, in Literninum concessit, ubi reliquam
egit aetatem sine urbis desiderio.

Cum in Liternina villa se contineret, complures praedonum duces ad eum
videndum forte confluxerunt. Quos cum ad vim faciendam venire
existimasset, praesidium servorum in tecto conlocavit aliaque parabat,
quae ad eos repellendos opus erant. Quod ubi praedones animadverterunt,
abiectis armis ianuae appropinquant et clara voce nuntiant Scipioni se
non vitae eius hostes, sed virtutis admiratores venisse, conspectum
tanti viri, quasi caeleste aliquod beneficium, expetentes; proinde ne
gravaretur se spectandum praebere. Haec postquam audivit Scipio, fores
reserari eosque introduci iussit. Illi postes ianuae tamquam
religiosissimam aram venerati, cupide Scipionis dextram apprehenderunt
ac diu deosculati sunt; deinde positis ante vestibulum donis laeti, quod
sibi Scipionem ut viderent contigisset, domum reverterunt. Paulo post
mortuus est Scipio moriensque ab uxore petiit ne corpus suum Romam
referretur.


  #XXI. Pûblius Cornêlius Scîpiô Âfricânus# [[as printed]]

    [Illustration: SCÎPIÔ]

  Pûblius Cornêlius Scîpiô[2] nôndum annôs
  pueritiae êgressus patrem singulârî virtûte
  servâvit; quî[3] cum pûgnâ[4] apud Tîcînum[5]
  contrâ Hannibalem commissâ graviter vulnerâtus
  in hostium manûs iam iam[6] ventûrus                               {5}
  esset, fîlius interiectô[7] corpore Poenîs inruentibus
  sê opposuit et patrem perîculô lîberâvit.
  Quae[8] pietâs Scîpiônî posteâ aedîlitâtem
  petentî favôrem populî conciliâvit. Cum obsisterent
  tribûnî plêbis, negantês[9] ratiônem êius esse habendam,          {10}
  quod nôndum ad petendum lêgitima[10] aetâs esset, "Sî mê" inquit
  Scîpiô "omnês Quirîtês aedîlem facere volunt, satis annôrum
  habeô." Tantô inde favôre ad suffrâgia itum[11] est, ut tribûnî
  inceptô dêsisterent.

  Post clâdem Cannênsem Rômânî exercitûs reliquiae Canusium         {15}
  perfûgerant; cumque ibi tribûnî mîlitum quattuor essent, tamen
  omnium cônsênsû ad Pûblium Scîpiônem, admodum[12] adulêscentem,
  summa imperiî dêlâta est. Quibus cônsultantibus nûntiat
    [[53]]
  Pûblius Fûrius Philus, cônsulâris virî fîlius, nôbilês quôsdam
  iuvenês propter dêspêrâtiônem cônsilium dê Italiâ dêserendâ       {20}
  inîre. Statim in hospitium Metellî, quî cônspîrâtiônis erat prînceps,
  sê contulit Scîpiô, et cum concilium ibi iuvenum, dê quibus
  adlâtum[1] erat, invênisset, strictô super câpita cônsultantium
  gladiô, "Iûrâte" inquit "vôs neque ipsôs rem pûblicam populî
  Rômânî dêsertûrôs, neque alium cîvem Rômânum dêserere             {25}
  passûrôs[2]: quî[3] nôn iûrâverit, in sê hunc gladium strictum esse
  sciat."[4] Haud[5] secus pavidî, quam sî victôrem Hannibalem
  cernerent,[6] iûrant omnês cûstôdiendôsque sêmet ipsôs Scîpiônî
  trâdunt.

  [Sidenote: B.C. 212.]

  Cum Rômânî duâs clâdês in Hispâniâ accêpissent duoque ibi         {30}
  summî imperâtôrês[7] intrâ diês trîgintâ cecidissent, placuit[8]
  exercitum augêrî eôque prôcônsulem mittî; nec tamen
  quem mitterent[9] satis cônstâbat. Eâ dê rê indicta sunt comitia.
  Prîmô populus exspectâbat ut, quî sê tantô dîgnôs imperiô         {34}
  crêderent,[10] nômina profitêrentur; sed nêmô audêbat illud imperium
  suscipere. Maesta igitur cîvitâs ac prope inops[11] cônsiliî[12]
  comitiôrum diê in campum dêscendit. Subitô P. Cornêlius Scîpiô,
  quattuor et vîgintî fermê annôs nâtus, professus sê petere,[13] in
  superiôre, unde[14] cônspicî posset, locô cônstitit. In quem
  postquam omnium ôra conversa sunt, ad ûnum omnês Scîpiônem in     {40}
  Hispâniâ prôcônsulem esse iussêrunt. At postquam animôrum[15]
  impetus resêdit, populum[16] Rômânum coepit factî paenitêre:
    [[54]]
  aetâtî Scîpiônis mâximê diffîdêbant. Quod ubi animadvertit
  Scîpiô, advocâtâ côntiône ita mâgnô êlâtôque animô dê bellô,
  quod gerendum esset, disseruit, ut hominês cûrâ lîberâret spêque  {45}
  certissimâ implêret.

  Profectus igitur in Hispâniam Scîpiô Carthâginem Novam,
  quô[1] diê vênit, expûgnâvit. Eô[2] congestae[3] erant omnês paene
  Âfricae et Hispâniae opês, ibi arma, ibi pecûnia, ibi tôtîus Hispâniae
  obsidês erant: quibus omnibus potîtus est Scîpiô. Inter           {50}
  captîvôs ad eum adducta est eximiae fôrmae adulta virgô. Quam
  ubi comperit inlûstrî locô inter Celtibêrôs nâtam prîncipîque êius
  gentis adulêscentî dêspônsam esse, arcessîtîs parentibus et spônsô
  eam reddidit. Parentês virginis, quî ad eam redimendam satis[4]
  mâgnum aurî pondus attulerant, Scîpiônem ôrâbant ut id â sê       {55}
  dônum acciperet. Scîpiô aurum ante pedês pônî iûssit vocâtôque
  ad sê virginis spônsô, "Super dôtem" inquit "quam acceptûrus
  â socerô es, haec tibi â mê dôtâlia dôna accêdent" aurumque
  tollere âc sibi habêre iûssit. Ille domum reversus ad referendam
  Scîpiônî grâtiam Celtibêrôs Rômânîs conciliâvit.                  {60}

  Deinde Scîpiô Hasdrubalem[5] victum[6] ex Hispâniâ expulit.
  Castrîs hostium potîtus omnem praedam mîlitibus concessit,
  captîvôs[7] Hispânôs sine pretiô domum dîmîsit; Âfrôs vêrô vêndî
  iussit. Erat inter eôs puer adultus rêgiî generis,[8] fôrmâ       {64}
  însîgnî[8]: quem cum percontârêtur Scîpiô quis et cûiâs esset, et
  cûr id[9] aetâtis in castrîs fuisset, "Numida sum" inquit puer,
  "Massîvam populârês vocant: orbus â patre relîctus, apud avum
  mâternum, Numidiae rêgem, êducâtus sum. Cum avunculô Masinissâ,
  quî nûper subsidiô Carthâginiênsibus vênit, in Hispâniam
    [[55]]
  trâiêcî; prohibitus propter aetâtem â Masinissâ numquam ante      {70}
  proelium iniî. Eô diê, quô pûgnâtum est cum Rômânîs, însciô
  avunculô, clam armîs equôque sûmptô, in aciem exiî: ibi, prôlâpsô
  equô, captus sum â Rômânîs." Scîpiô eum interrogat velletne[1]
  ad avunculum revertî. Cum, effûsîs[2] gaudiô lacrimîs, id
  vêrô sê cupere puer dîceret, tum Scîpiô puerô ânulum aureum       {75}
  equumque ôrnâtum dônat datîsque quî[3] tûtô dêdûcerent equitibus
  dîmîsit.

  Cum Pûblius Cornêlius Scîpiô sê ergâ Hispânôs clêmenter gessisset,
  circumfûsa multitûdô eum rêgem ingentî cônsênsû appellâvit;
  at Scîpiô, silentiô per praecônem factô, "Nômen imperâtôris"      {80}
  inquit, "quô[4] mê meî mîlitês appellârunt, mihi[5] mâximum est:
  rêgium[6] nômen, alibî mâgnum, Rômae intolerâbile est. Sî id
  amplissimum iûdicâtis, quod rêgâle est, vôbîs licet exîstimâre rêgâlem
  in mê esse animum; sed ôrô vôs ut â rêgis appellâtiône abstineâtis."
  Sênsêre etiam barbarî mâgnitûdinem animî, quâ Scîpiô id           {85}
  âspernâbâtur, quod cêterî mortâlês admîrantur et concupîscunt.

  [Sidenote: B.C. 206.]

  Scîpiô receptâ Hispâniâ cum iam bellum in ipsam Âfricam
  trânsferre meditârêtur, conciliandôs[7] prius rêgum et gentium
  animôs exîstimâvit. Syphâcem, Maurôrum rêgem, opulentissimum
  tôtîus Âfricae rêgem, quem[8] mâgnô ûsuî[9] sibi[9] fore[10] spêrâret,
  prîmum tentâre statuit. Itaque lêgâtum cum dônîs ad eum mîsit     {91}
  C. Laelium, quôcum intimâ familiâritâte vîvêbat. Syphâx amîcitiam
  Rômânôrum sê accipere adnuit, sed fidem nec dare
  nec accipere, nisi cum ipsô côram duce Rômânô, voluit.
  Scîpiô igitur in Âfricam trâiêcit. Forte ita incidit, ut eô ipsô  {95}
    [[56]]
  tempore Hasdrubal[1] pulsus Hispâniâ ad eundem portum appelleret,[2]
  Syphâcis amîcitiam pariter petîtûrus.[3] Uterque â rêge in
  hospitium invîtâtus. Cênâtum[4] simul apud rêgem est; eôdem
  etiam lectô[5] Scîpiô atque Hasdrubal accubuêrunt. Tanta autem
  inerat cômitâs in Scîpiône, ut nôn Syphâcem modo, sed etiam      {100}
  hostem înfêstissimum Hasdrubalem sibi conciliâret. Scîpiô, foedere
  îctô cum Syphâce, in Hispâniam ad exercitum rediit.

  Masinissa quoque amîcitiam cum Scîpiône iungere iam dûdum[6]
  cupiêbat. Quârê ad eum três Numidârum prîncipês mîsit ad         {104}
  tempus locumque conloquiô statuendum. Duôs prô obsidibus retinêrî
  â Scîpiône iubet; remissô tertiô, quî Masinissam ad locum
  cônstitûtum addûceret, Scîpiô et Masinissa cum paucîs in
  conloquium vênêrunt. Cêperat iam ante Numidam ex fâmâ rêrum
  gestârum admîrâtiô virî, sed mâior praesentis[7] venerâtiô cêpit:
  erat enim in vultû mâiestâs summa; accêdêbat prômissa caesariês  {110}
  habitusque corporis, nôn cultus[8] munditiîs, sed virîlis vêrê ac
  mîlitâris, et flôrêns iuventa. Prope attonitus ipsô congressû
  Numida grâtiâs dê[9] fîliô frâtris remissô agit: adfîrmat sê ex eô
  tempore eam quaesîvisse[10] occâsiônem, quam tandem oblâtam[11]
  nôn omîserit; cupere sê illî et populô Rômânô operam nâvâre.  {115|
  Laetus eum Scîpiô audîvit atque in societâtem recêpit.

  Scîpiô deinde Rômam rediit et ante annôs[12] cônsul factus est.
  Sicilia eî prôvincia dêcrêta est permissumque ut in Âfricam inde
    [[57]]
  trâiceret. Quî cum vellet ex fortissimîs peditibus Rômânîs
  trecentôrum equitum numerum complêre, nec posset illôs subitô    {120}
  armîs et equîs înstruere, id prûdentî cônsiliô perfêcit. Namque
  ex omnî Siciliâ trecentôs iuvenês nôbilissimôs et dîtissimôs, quî
  equîs mîlitârent[1] et sêcum in Âfricam trâicerent,[1] lêgit diemque
  iîs êdîxit, quâ[2] equîs armîsque înstrûctî atque ôrnâtî adessent.[1]
  Gravis ea mîlitia, procul domô, terrâ marîque multôs labôrês,    {125}
  mâgna perîcula adlâtûra vidêbâtur; neque ipsôs modo, sed parentês
  côgnâtôsque eôrum ea cûra angêbat. Ubi diês quae dicta
  erat advênit, arma equôsque ostendêrunt, sed omnês ferê
  longinquum et grave bellum horrêre appârêbat. Tunc Scîpiô mîlitiam
  iîs sê remissûrum ait, sî arma et equôs mîlitibus Rômânîs        {130}
  voluissent[3] trâdere. Laetî condiciônem accêpêrunt iuvenês Siculî.
  Ita Scîpiô sine pûblicâ impênsâ suôs înstrûxit ôrnâvitque equitês.

  Tunc Scîpiô ex Siciliâ in Âfricam ventô secundô profectus est
  tantô mîlitum ârdôre, ut nôn ad bellum dûcî vidêrentur, sed ad
  certa victôriae praemia. Celeriter nâvês ê cônspectû Siciliae    {135}
  ablâtae sunt cônspectaque brevî Âfricae lîtora. Scîpiô cum êgrediêns
  ad terram nâvî prôlâpsus esset et ob hôc attonitôs mîlitês
  cerneret, id, quod trepidâtiônem adferêbat, in hortâtiônem convertêns,
  "Âfricam oppressî" inquit, "mîlitês!" Expositîs côpiîs in        {139}
  proximîs tumulîs castra mêtâtus[4] est. Ibi speculâtôrês hostium
  in castrîs dêprehênsôs[5] et ad sê perductôs[5] nec suppliciô adfêcit
  nec dê cônsiliîs ac vîribus Poenôrum percontâtus est, sed circâ
  omnês Rômânî exercitûs manipulôs cûrâvit dêdûcendôs; dein
  interrogâtôs[6] num ea satis cônsîderâssent, quae speculârî erant
  iûssî, prandiô datô incolumês dîmîsit.                           {145}

    [[58]]
  Scîpiônî in Âfricam advenientî Masinissa sê coniûnxit cum
  parvâ equitum turmâ. Syphâx vêrô â Rômânîs ad Poenôs dêfêcerat.
  Hasdrubal, Poenôrum dux, Syphâxque Scîpiônî sê opposuêrunt,
  quî utrîusque castra ûnâ nocte perrûpit et incendit.
  Syphâx ipse captus et vîvus ad Scîpiônem pertrâctus est.         {150}
  Syphâcem in castra addûcî cum esset nûntiâtum, omnis velut ad
  spectâculum triumphî multitûdô effûsa est; praecêdêbat ipse[1]
  vinctus, sequêbâtur grex nôbilium Maurôrum. Movêbat omnês
  fortûna[2] virî, cûius amîcitiam ôlim Scîpiô petierat. Rêgem
  aliôsque captîvôs Rômam mîsit Scîpiô; Masinissam, quî êgregiê rem
  Rômânam adiûverat, aureâ corônâ dônâvit.                         {156}

  [Sidenote: B.C. 203.]

  [Sidenote: B.C. 202.]

  Haec et aliae, quae sequêbantur, clâdês Carthâginiênsibus
  tantum terrôris intulêrunt, ut Hannibalem ex Îtaliâ ad
  tuendam patriam revocârent. Frendêns gemênsque ac vix
  lacrimîs[3] temperâns is dîcitur lêgâtôrum vêrba audîsse         {160}
  mandâtîsque pâruisse. Respexit saepe Îtaliae lîtora, sêmet accûsâns,
  quod[4] nôn victôrem exercitum statim ab[5] Cannênsî pûgnâ Rômam
  dûxisset. Zamam vênerat Hannibal, quae urbs quînque diêrum
  iter[6] â Carthâgine abest, et nûntium ad Scîpiônem mîsit ut     {164}
  conloquendî sêcum potestâtem faceret. Scîpiô cum conloquium haud
  abnuisset, diês locusque cônstituitur. Itaque congressî sunt duo
  clârissimî suae aetâtis ducês. Stetêrunt aliquamdiû tacitî mûtuâque
  admîrâtiône dêfîxî.[7] Cum vêrô dê condiciônibus pâcis inter
  eôs nôn convênisset, ad suôs sê recêpêrunt, renûntiantês armîs[8]
  dêcernendum esse. Commissô deinde proeliô Hannibal               {170}
  victus cum quattuor equitibus fûgit. Cêterum[9] cônstat
    [[59]]
  utrumque dê alterô cônfessum esse nec melius înstruî aciem nec
  âcrius potuisse pûgnârî.

  Carthâginiênsês metû perculsî[1] ad petendam pâcem ôrâtôrês
  mittunt trîgintâ cîvitâtis prîncipês. Quî ubi in castra Rômâna   {175}
  vênêrunt, veniam cîvitâtî petêbant nôn culpam pûrgantês,[2] sed
  initium culpae in Hannibalem trânsferentês.[2] Victîs lêgês
  imposuit Scîpiô. Lêgâtî, cum nûllâs condiciônês recûsârent, Rômam
  profectî sunt, ut, quae â Scîpiône pacta[3] essent, ea patrum ac
  populî auctôritâte cônfîrmârentur. Ita pâce terrâ marîque        {180}
  partâ,[4] Scîpiô exercitû in nâvês impositô Rômam revertit. Ad
  quem advenientem concursus ingêns factus est; effûsa nôn ex
  urbibus modo, sed etiam ex agrîs multitûdô viam obsidêbat.
  Scîpiô inter grâtulantium plausûs triumphô omnium[5] clârissimô
  urbem est invectus prîmusque nômine victae â sê gentis est       {185}
  nôbilitâtus Âfricânusque appellâtus.

    [Illustration: TEMPLE OF IUPPITER CAPITÔLÎNUS]

  Ex hîs rêbus gestîs virum eum esse virtûtis dîvînae vulgô
  crêditum est. Id etiam dîcere haud piget,[6] quod scrîptôrês dê
  eô litterîs mandâvêrunt, Scîpiônem cônsuêvisse, priusquam
  dîlûcêsceret, in Capitôlium[7] ventitâre ac iubêre               {190}
  aperîrî cellam Iovis ibi sôlum diû dêmorârî,
  quasi cônsultantem dê rê pûblicâ cum Iove:
  aedituôsque êius templî saepe esse mîrâtôs,
  quod eum id[8] temporis in Capitôlium
  ingredientem canês, semper in aliôs saevientês,                  {195}
  nôn lâtrârent. Hâs vulgî dê Scîpiône
  opîniônês cônfîrmâre atque approbâre vidêbantur
  dicta factaque êius plêraque admîranda, ex
  quibus est ûnum hûiuscemodî. Adsidêbat oppûgnâbatque oppidum
    [[60]]
  in Hispâniâ, sitû moenibusque ac dêfênsôribus validum et         {200}
  mûnîtum, rê etiam cibâriâ côpiôsum, neque ûlla êius potiundî
  spês erat. Quôdam diê iûs in castrîs sedêns dîcêbat Scîpiô atque
  ex eô locô id oppidum procul vidêbâtur. Tum ê[1] mîlitibus, quî
  in iûre apud eum stâbant, interrogâvit quispiam ex môre in[2]
  quem diem locumque vadês sistî iubêret. Et Scîpiô manum ad       {205}
  ipsam oppidî, quod obsidêbâtur, arcem prôtendêns, "Perendiê"
  inquit "sêsê[3] sistant illô in locô," atque ita factum. Diê[4]
tertiâ,
  in quam vadês sistî iusserat, oppidum captum est. Eôdem diê
  in arce êius oppidî iûs dîxit.

  Hannibal, â Scîpiône victus suîsque invîsus, ad Antiochum,       {210}
  Syriae rêgem, cônfûgit eumque hostem Rômânîs fêcit. Missî
  sunt Rômâ lêgâtî ad Antiochum, in quibus erat Scîpiô Âfricânus,
  quî cum Hannibale Ephesî[5] conlocûtus ab eô quaesîvit, quem
  fuisse mâximum imperâtôrem crêderet. Respondit Hannibal
  Alexandrum, Macedonum rêgem, mâximum sibi vidêrî, quod           {215}
  parvâ manû innumerâbilês exercitûs fûdisset. Quaerentî deinde,
  quem secundum pôneret, "Pyrrhum" inquit, "quod prîmus castra[6]
  mêtârî docuit nêmôque illô[7] êlegantius loca[8] cêpit et praesidia
  dêposuit." Scîscitantî dênique quem tertium dûceret, sêmet ipsum
  dîxit. Tum rîdêns Scîpiô "Quidnam tû dîcerês[9]" inquit "sî mê   {220}
  vîcissês[9]?" "Tum[10] mê vêrô" respondit Hannibal "et ante
  Alexandrum et ante Pyrrhum et ante omnês aliôs imperâtôrês
  posuissem.[9]" Ita imprôvîsô adsentâtiônis genere Scîpiônem ê
  grege imperâtôrum velut inaestimâbilem sêcernêbat.

    [[61]]
  Scîpiô ipse fertur quondam dîxisse, cum eum quîdam parum         {225}
  pûgnâcem dîcerent, "Imperâtôrem mê mâter, nôn bellâtôrem[1]
  peperit.[2]" Îdem dîcere solitus est nôn sôlum dandam esse viam
  fugientibus, sed etiam mûniendam.

  Dêcrêtô adversus Antiochum bellô[3] cum Syria prôvincia          {229}
  obvênisset Lûciô Scîpiônî, quia parum in eô putâbâtur esse animî,[4]
  parum rôboris,[4] senâtus gerendî hûius bellî cûram mandârî volêbat
  conlêgae êius C. Laeliô. Surgêns tunc Scîpiô Âfricânus,
  frâter mâior Lûciî Scîpiônis, illam familiae îgnôminiam
  dêprecâtus est: dîxit in frâtre suô summam esse virtûtem, summum
  cônsilium sêque eî lêgâtum fore prômîsit. Quod cum ab eô esset   {235}
  dictum, nihil[5] est dê Lûciî Scîpiônis prôvinciâ commûtâtum:
  itaque frâter nâtû mâior minôrî lêgâtus in Asiam profectus est
  et tam diû eum cônsiliô operâque adiûvit, dônec triumphum ille
  et côgnômen Asiâticî peperisset.

  Eôdem bellô fîlius Scîpiônis Âfricânî captus est et ad Antiochum
  dêductus. Benîgnê et lîberâliter adulêscentem rêx habuit,[6]     {241}
  quamquam ab êius patre tum[7] mâximê fînibus imperiî pellêbâtur.
  Cum deinde pâcem Antiochus â Rômânîs peteret, lêgâtus êius
  Pûblium Scîpiônem adiit eîque fîlium sine pretiô redditûrum
  rêgem dîxit, sî per eum pâcem impetrâsset.[8] Cuî Scîpiô respondit
  "Abî, nûntiâ rêgî, mê prô tantô mûnere grâtiâs[9] agere; sed     {246}
  nunc aliam grâtiam nôn possum referre, quam ut eî suâdeam[10] ut
  bellô absistat et pâcis condiciônem nûllam recûset." Pâx nôn
  convênit[11]; tamen Antiochus Scîpiônî fîlium remîsit tantîque virî
  mâiestâtem venerârî quam dolôrem suum ulcîscî mâluit.            {250}

  Victô Antiochô cum praedae ratiô â L. Scîpiône repôscerêtur,
    [[62]]
  Âfricânus prôlâtum[1] ab eô librum, quô[2] acceptae et expênsae
  summae continêbantur et refellî inimîcôrum accûsâtiô poterat,
  discerpsit, indîgnâtus[3] dê eâ rê dubitârî, quae sub ipsô lêgâtô
  administrâta esset. Quîn etiam hunc[4] in modum verba fêcit:     {255}
  "Nôn[5] est quod quaerâtis, patrês cônscrîptî, num parvam pecûniam
  in aerârium rettulerim, quî anteâ illud Pûnicô aurô replêverim,
  neque mea innocentia potest in dubium vocârî. Cum
  Âfricam tôtam potestâtî vestrae subiêcerim, nihil ex eâ praeter
  côgnômen rettulî. Nôn igitur mê Pûnicae, nôn frâtrem meum        {260}
  Asiâticae gazae avârum reddidêrunt; sed uterque nostrum[6]
  invidiâ quam pecûniâ est locuplêtior." Tam cônstantem dêfênsiônem
  Scîpiônis ûniversus senâtus comprobâvit.

    [Illustration: CORÔNA TRIUMPHÂLIS]

  Deinde Scîpiônî Âfricânô duo tribûnî plêbis diem dîxêrunt,
  quod praedâ ex Antiochô captâ aerârium fraudâsset. Ubi causae    {265}
  dîcendae diês vênit, Scîpiô mâgnâ hominum frequentiâ in Forum
  est dêductus. Iussus causam dîcere rôstra cônscendit et, corônâ[7]
  triumphâlî capitî suô impositâ, "Hôc ego diê"
  inquit "Hannibalem Poenum, imperiô nostrô
  inimîcissimum, mâgnô proeliô vîcî in terrâ                       {270}
  Âfricâ pâcemque nôbîs et victôriam peperî
  înspêrâbilem. Nê[8] igitur sîmus adversus deôs
  ingrâtî, sed cênseô relinquâmus[9] nebulônês hôs
  eâmusque nunc prôtinus in Capitôlium Iovî
  optimô mâximô supplicâtum." Â rôstrîs in Capitôlium âscendit;    {275}
  simul sê ûniversa côntiô ab accûsâtôribus âvertit et secûta Scîpiônem
    [[63]]
  est, nec quisquam praeter praecônem, quî reum citâbat, cum
  tribûnîs remânsit. Celebrâtior is diês favôre[1] hominum fuit, quam
  quô[2] triumphâns dê Syphâce rêge et Carthâginiênsibus urbem est
  ingressus. Inde, nê amplius tribûnîciîs iniûriîs vexârêtur, in   {280}
  Lîternînum concessit, ubi reliquam êgit aetâtem sine urbis dêsîderiô.

  Cum in Lîternînâ vîllâ sê continêret, complûrês praedônum
  ducês ad eum videndum forte cônfluxêrunt. Quôs cum ad vim
  faciendam venîre exîstimâsset, praesidium servôrum in têctô
  conlocâvit aliaque parâbat, quae[3] ad eôs repellendôs opus erant.
  Quod ubi praedônês animadvertêrunt, abiectîs armîs iânuae        {286}
  appropinquant et clârâ vôce nûntiant Scîpiônî sê nôn vîtae êius
hostês,
  sed virtûtis admîrâtôrês vênisse, cônspectum[4] tantî virî, quasi
  caeleste aliquod beneficium, expetentês; proinde nê[5] gravârêtur
  sê spectandum praebêre. Haec postquam audîvit Scîpiô, forês      {290}
  reserârî eôsque intrôdûcî iussit. Illî postês iânuae tamquam
  religiôsissimam âram venerâtî, cupidê Scîpiônis dextram
  apprehendêrunt ac diû deôsculâtî sunt; deinde positîs ante vêstibulum
  dônîs laetî, quod sibi Scîpiônem ut vidêrent contigisset, domum
  revertêrunt. Paulô post mortuus est Scîpiô moriênsque ab uxôre   {295}
  petiit nê corpus suum Rômam referrêtur.

    [Footnotes: XXI (pages 52-63)

    52.2: See Vocab., _Âfricânus_ and _Scîpiô_.
    52.3: #quî cum#: 'for when he.' Cf. p. 4, n. 3.
    52.4: 'in (the course of) the battle.' _pûgna_, like _bellum_ and
    _proelium_, is often used in the abl. of time without a prep.
    52.5: Cf. XIX, 16.
    52.6: #iam iam . . . esset#: 'was on the very point of falling.'
    52.7: #interiectô corpore#: 'by interposing his body.' See p.
    xxiii, K 8.
    52.8: #Quae pietâs#: 'this act of devotion.'
    52.9: #negantês . . . habendam#: 'by saying that no account should
    be taken of him.' For #negantês#, see p. 41, n. 15. _ratiônem
    habêre_ is a phrase of mercantile life.
    52.10: Scipio was less than twenty-five years old. In later times
    no one could be aedile till he had completed his thirty-sixth
    year.
    52.11: impersonal pass. from _eô_: 'they proceeded.'
    52.12: #admodum adulêscentem#: 'though but,' etc.
    53.1: #adlâtum erat#: impersonal pass.: 'the news had been
    brought.'
    53.2: _patior_.
    53.3: #quî . . . iûrâverit# (fut. perf. indic.) = a conditional
    clause, _sî quis nôn iûrâverit_. Cf. _quî . . . crêderent_, l. 35,
    below.
    53.4: Cf. p. 31, n. 9.
    53.5: #Haud . . . sî#: 'Quite as much frightened as if.'
    53.6: Cf. p. 47, n. 12.
    53.7: P. Cornelius Scipio and Cn. Cornelius Scipio, respectively
    father and uncle of Africanus.
    53.8: Sc. _senâtuî_ or _populô_.
    53.9: Cf. p. 3, n. 2.
    53.10: Subjunctive by attraction: see p. 13, n. 10.
    53.11: #inops cônsiliî#: 'at its wit's end.'
    53.12: The gen. is regularly used with adjectives denoting
    fullness or the opposite: H 451, 2 (399, I, 3): M 573: A 218, a:
    G 374: B 204, 1.
    53.13: = 'to be a candidate.'
    53.14: #unde . . . posset = ut inde . . . posset#; cf. p. 5, n. 3.
    53.15: #animôrum impetus#: 'enthusiasm,' 'excitement.'
    53.16: #populum . . . paenitêre#: cf. _Vêientês . . .
    paenituisset_, XI, 13, and note.
    54.1: Cf. p. 42, n. 5.
    54.2: = _in eum locum_.
    54.3: _congerô_.
    54.4: #satis# often = our 'tolerably.'
    54.5: A brother of Hannibal.
    54.6: #victum . . . expulit# = _vîcit et expulit_.
    54.7: = '_but_ the captives,' etc. Cf. p. 2, n. 24, and p. 5,
    n. 13.
    54.8: We have here side by side the gen. and the abl. of
    characteristic. For the difference between them, see H 473, 2, N.
    1 (419, 2): M 558: A 215, N.: G 400, R. 1.
    54.9: #id aetâtis#: 'at that age,' i.e. though he was so young.
    The accus. #id# is variously explained: see H 416, 2 (378, 2):
    M 507: A 240, _b_: G 336, N. 2; B 185. #aetâtis# is partitive gen.
    (p. 30, n. 2) with #id#.
    55.1: Why is #vellet# subjunctive?
    55.2: #effûsîs# (_effundô_) . . . #lacrimîs#: 'with tears of joy.'
    How literally?
    55.3: #quî . . . dêdûcerent#: 'to escort him.'
    55.4: #quô . . . appellârunt#: Roman soldiers, after a victory,
    hailed their general as Imperator. It was a way of saying that the
    leader had won his spurs and had really earned his title, which he
    had assumed on beginning the campaign.
    55.5: 'in my eyes,' 'to my mind'; a dative of reference.
    55.6: #rêgium nômen# = _rêgis nômen_, 'the title of king.' Cf.
    _nômen imperâtôris_, l. 80, and _rêgis appellâtiône_, l. 84.
    55.7: Sc. _esse_.
    55.8: #quem . . . spêrâret#: causal rel. clause (p. 31, n. 1).
    55.9: For the two datives, see p. 25, n. 6.
    55.10: future infinitive of _sum_.
    56.1: Son of Gisco (so also in l. 148); to be carefully
    distinguished from the Hasdrubal of l. 61.
    56.2: Sc. _nâvem_; 'was sailing.'
    56.3: _= ut peteret_. Cf. p. xviii, E 5.
    56.4: #Cênâtum . . . est# (_ab iîs_): impers. pass.; 'they dined.'
    56.5: #lectô . . . accubuêrunt# (_accumbô_): the writer has in
    mind the Roman custom, according to which men reclined at meals,
    supporting themselves on the left elbow. Three persons or more
    occupied the same couch.
    56.6: #iam dûdum cupiêbat#: 'had long desired.' _Iam diû_, _iam
    dûdum_, and _iam prîdem_ give to the _present_ the force of the
    English _perfect_, to the _imperfect_ the force of the English
    _pluperfect_.
    56.7: Sc. _êius_: 'of him present' = 'now that he met him face to
    face.'
    56.8: #cultus# (_colô_) #munditiîs#: '(too) elegantly adorned.'
    How literally?
    56.9: #dê . . . remissô#: 'for the release of his nephew.' For the
    construction, see p. 5, n. 15.
    56.10: _quaerô_.
    56.11: #oblâtam# (_offerô_): 'now that it was at last offered.'
    56.12: 'the legal time'; _lêgitima aetâs_, l. 11. In later days
    forty-three was the legal age.
    57.1: See p. 5, n. 3.
    57.2: Sc. _diê_, for the gender of which, as in _diês, quae dicta
    erat_, l. 127, see Vocab., _diês_.
    57.3: For mood and tense, see p. 6, n. 1. What did Scipio say?
    57.4: 'pitched,' lit. 'measured.' The Roman camp was always laid
    out with great care, according to a fixed plan, and was carefully
    fortified, even if the stay was to last but one night.
    57.5: The participles = rel. clauses: see p. xxiv, L 1.
    57.6: #interrogâtôs# (sc. _eôs_) #. . . dîmîsit# = _interrogâvit
    (eôs) . . . et . . . dîmîsit_, or _cum (eôs) . . . interrogâsset,
    . . . dîmîsit_.
    58.1: = Syphax. For _ipse_ referring to the principal personage,
    see also I, 5, and II, 4 [[notes 2.5 and 5.1]].
    58.2: 'misfortune.' So _fâma_ = both 'fame' and 'ill repute,'
    _valêtûdô_ = both 'health' and 'sickness.'
    58.3: dat. of indir. object with #temperâns#.
    58.4: #quod . . . dûxisset.# What does the subjunctive show?
    58.5: #ab . . . dûxisset#: cf. p. 50, n. 4.
    58.6: acc. of extent of space: cf. p. xvii, D 2.
    58.7: 'motionless.'
    58.8: #armîs . . . esse#: 'that the issue must be decided by
    arms.' Note the method employed in translating the impers. passive
    here and in lines 13, 23, and 98, and apply it to #pûgnârî#,
    l. 173.
    58.9: #Cêterum cônstat#: 'it is, however, well known.'
    59.1: _percellô_.
    59.2: Cf. _negantês_, l. 10, and p. 6, n. 20.
    59.3: #pacta# (_pacîscor_) #essent#: subjunctive by attraction:
    see p. 13, n. 10.
    59.4: _pariô_.
    59.5: i.e. of all ever celebrated in Rome.
    59.6: #haud piget#: sc. _mê_; 'I am not ashamed.' _piget_ is
    construed exactly like _paenitet_: see p. 28, n. 7.
    59.7: Here = the temple, sacred to Jupiter, Juno, and Minerva.
    59.8: #id temporis# = _eô tempore_. Cf. note on _id aetâtis_,
    l. 66.
    60.1: Join #ê mîlitibus# with #quispiam#, l. 204.
    60.2: #in . . . iubêret#: 'when and where he bade (the accused)
    appear for trial.' #vadês sistî# is the passive of _vadês
    sistere_, a legal phrase = 'to make one's bail stand,' i.e. to
    make it effective, and so 'to stand trial.' _Sistere_ often means
    'to produce in court,' as in l. 207.
    60.3: #sêsê sistant#: 'let them produce themselves,' i.e. appear
    for trial.
    60.4: #Diê tertiâ# = _perendiê_, l. 206. In counting days, the
    Romans usually included the day from which they started.
    60.5: locative.
    60.6: Cf. n. on _castra mêtâtus est_, l. 140.
    60.7: #illô êlegantius#: 'more judiciously than he.' For #illô#,
    see p. 10, n. 18.
    60.8: Sc. _castrîs_.
    60.9: See p. 47, n. 12. #dîcerês# is imperfect, as referring to
    present time; the other verbs denote past time.
    60.10: 'in that event'; = _sî tê vîcissem_.
    61.1: 'a (mere) fighter.'
    61.2: _pariô_.
    61.3: This war lasted from 192 to 190.
    61.4: partitive gen. with #parum#, which is here a noun. In l. 225
    it was an adverb.
    61.5: #nihil . . . commûtâtum#: 'no change was made.' Note that
    #nihil# is an adverbial acc. of degree, and that #commûtâtum est#
    is impersonal.
    61.6: 'treated.'
    61.7: #tum mâximê#: 'at that very moment.'
    61.8: Explain mood and tense.
    61.9: Distinguish between _grâtiâs agere_ and _grâtiam referre_.
    61.10: Notice that _suâdeô_ = merely 'to advise'; 'to persuade' is
    _persuâdeô_.
    61.11: 'was not arranged.'
    62.1: = _quî prôlâtus erat_; cf. p. xxiv, L 1.
    62.2: abl. of means (though rendered 'in which') both with
    #continêbantur# and #refellî poterat#.
    62.3: #indîgnâtus . . . dubitârî#: 'angry because doubts were
    raised.' For the infin. see p. 19, n. 6.
    62.4: See p. 16, n. 9. #verba fêcit#: 'he delivered a speech.'
    62.5: #Nôn . . . quaerâtis#: 'there is no reason why you should
    ask'; lit., 'there is not (anything) as to which,' etc. H 591, 4
    (503, 1, N. 2): M 836: A 320, _a_: G 631, 2: B 283, 2.
    62.6: _nostrum_, like _vestrum_, is regularly used only as a
    partitive gen.
    62.7: A crown of laurel, worn by the general at his triumph.
    62.8: #Nê . . . sîmus#: cf. p. 31, n. 9.
    62.9: (_ut_) #relinquâmus . . . eâmus# is a substantive clause of
    purpose. For the omission of _ut_ see H 565, 4 (499, 2): M 781:
    A 331, _f_, R.: G 546, R. 2: B 295, 8.
    63.1: abl. of specification.
    63.2: #quô# (sc. _diê_) = _eô diê quô_.
    63.3: #quae . . . opus erant#: 'which were necessary'; lit. 'which
    were a necessity.' For a very different construction with _opus_,
    cf. _nihil opus esse . . . eô cîve_, XV, 22, and note.
    63.4: #cônspectum . . . expetentês#: 'craving a chance to see so
    great a man, as a sort of heaven-sent favor.'
    63.5: #nê . . . gravârêtur#: the subjunctive is used here in
    indir. disc., as representing an imperative of the direct: H 642,
    4 (523, III): M 1023: A 339: G 652: B 316.]


#XXII. Tiberius Gracchus et Gaius Gracchus# [[stripped text]]

Tiberius et Gaius Gracchi Scipionis Africani ex filia nepotes erant.
Horum adulescentia bonis artibus et magna omnium spe exacta est: ad
egregiam enim indolem optima accedebat educatio. Erant enim diligentia
Corneliae matris a pueris docti et Graecis litteris eruditi. Maximum
matronis ornamentum esse liberos bene institutos merito putabat mater
illa sapientissima. Cum Campana matrona, apud illam hospita, ornamenta
sua, illo saeculo pulcherrima, ostentaret ei muliebriter, Cornelia
traxit eam sermone quousque e schola redirent liberi. Quos reversos
hospitae ostendens, "Haec" inquit "mea ornamenta sunt." Nihil quidem his
adulescentibus neque a natura neque a doctrina defuit; sed ambo rem
publicam, quam tueri poterant, perturbare maluerunt.

Tiberius Gracchus, tribunus plebis creatus, a senatu descivit: populi
favorem profusis largitionibus sibi conciliavit; agros plebi dividebat;
provincias novis coloniis replebat. Cum autem tribuniciam potestatem
sibi prorogari vellet et palam dictitasset, interempto senatu omnia per
plebem agi debere, viam sibi ad regnum parare videbatur. Quare cum
convocati patres deliberarent quidnam faciendum esset, statim Tiberius
Capitolium petit, manum ad caput referens, quo signo salutem suam populo
commendabat. Hoc nobilitas ita accepit, quasi diadema posceret,
segniterque cessante consule, Scipio Nasica, cum esset consobrinus
Tiberii Gracchi, patriam cognationi praeferens sublata dextra
proclamavit: "Qui rem publicam salvam esse volunt, me sequantur!" Dein
optimates, senatus atque equestris ordinis pars maior in Gracchum
inruunt, qui fugiens decurrensque Clivo Capitolino fragmento subsellii
ictus vitam, quam gloriosissime degere potuerat, immatura morte finivit.
Mortui Tiberii corpus in flumen proiectum est.

Gaium Gracchum idem furor, qui fratrem, Tiberium, occupavit. Tribunatum
enim adeptus, seu vindicandae fraternae necis, seu comparandae regiae
potentiae causa, pessima coepit inire consilia: maximas largitiones
fecit; aerarium effudit: legem de frumento plebi dividendo tulit:
civitatem omnibus Italicis dabat. His Gracchi consiliis quanta poterant
contentione obsistebant omnes boni, in quibus maxime Piso, vir
consularis. Is cum multa contra legem frumentariam dixisset, lege tamen
lata ad frumentum cum ceteris accipiendum venit. Gracchus ubi
animadvertit in contione Pisonem stantem, eum sic compellavit audiente
populo Romano: "Qui tibi constas, Piso, cum ea lege frumentum petas,
quam dissuasisti?" Cui Piso "Nolim quidem, Gracche" inquit, "mea bona
tibi viritim dividere liceat; sed si facies, partem petam." Quo responso
aperte declaravit vir gravis et sapiens lege, quam tulerat Gracchus,
patrimonium publicum dissipari.

Decretum a senatu est ut videret consul Opimius ne quid detrimenti res
publica caperet: quod nisi in maximo discrimine decerni non solebat.
Gaius Gracchus, armata familia, Aventinum occupavit. Consul, vocato ad
arma populo, Gaium aggressus est, qui pulsus profugit et, cum iam
comprehenderetur, iugulum servo praebuit, qui dominum et mox semet ipsum
super domini corpus interemit. Ut Tiberii Gracchi antea corpus, ita Gaii
mira crudelitate victorum in Tiberim deiectum est. Caput autem a
Septimuleio, amico Gracchi, ad Opimium relatum auro repensum fertur.
Sunt qui tradunt infuso plumbo eum partem capitis, quo gravius
efficeretur, explesse.

Occiso Tiberio Graccho cum senatus consulibus mandasset, ut in eos, qui
cum Graccho consenserant, animadverteretur, Blosius quidam, Tiberii
amicus, pro se deprecatum venit, hanc, ut sibi ignosceretur, causam
adferens, quod tanti Gracchum fecisset, ut, quidquid ille vellet, sibi
faciendum putaret. Tum consul "Quid?" inquit "si te Gracchus templo
Iovis in Capitolio faces subdere iussisset, obsecuturusne voluntati
illius fuisses propter istam, quam iactas, familiaritatem?" "Numquam"
inquit Blosius "voluisset id quidem, sed si voluisset, paruissem."
Nefaria est ea vox, nulla enim est excusatio peccati, si amici causa
peccaveris.

Exstat Gaii Gracchi e Sardinia Romam reversi oratio, in qua cum alia tum
haec de se narrat: "Versatus sum in provincia, quomodo ex usu vestro
existimabam esse, non quomodo ambitioni meae conducere arbitrabar. Nemo
possit vere dicere assem aut eo plus in muneribus me accepisse aut mea
causa quemquam sumptum fecisse. Zonas, quas Roma proficiscens plenas
argenti extuli, eas ex provincia inanes rettuli. Alii amphoras, quas
vini plenas extulerunt, eas argento repletas domum reportarunt."


  #XXII. Tiberius Gracchus et Gâius Gracchus# [[as printed]]

  Tiberius et Gâius Gracchî[6] Scîpiônis Âfricânî[7] ex fîliâ[8]
  nepôtês erant. Hôrum adulêscentia bonîs artibus et mâgnâ omnium spê
    [[64]]
  exâcta est: ad êgregiam enim indolem optima accêdêbat êducâtiô.
  Erant enim dîligentiâ Cornêliae mâtris â[1] puerîs doctî et Graecîs
  lîtterîs[2] êrudîtî. Mâximum mâtrônîs ôrnâmentum esse lîberôs      {5}
  bene înstitûtôs meritô putâbat mâter illa sapientissima. Cum
  Campâna mâtrôna, apud illam hospita,[3] ôrnâmenta sua, illô
  saeculô[4] pulcherrima, ostentâret eî muliebriter,[5] Cornêlia trâxit
  eam sermône quoûsque[6] ê scholâ redîrent lîberî. Quôs reversôs
  hospitae ostendêns, "Haec" inquit "mea ôrnâmenta sunt." Nihil[7]  {10}
  quidem hîs adulêscentibus neque[7] â nâtûrâ neque[7] â doctrînâ
  dêfuit; sed[8] ambô rem pûblicam, quam tuêrî poterant, perturbâre
  mâluêrunt.

  [Sidenote: B.C. 134.]

  Tiberius Gracchus, tribûnus plêbis creâtus, â senâtû dêscîvit:
  populî favôrem profûsîs largîtiônibus sibi conciliâvit;           {15}
  agrôs[9] plêbî dîvidêbat; prôvinciâs novîs colôniîs[10]
  replêbat. Cum autem tribûnîciam potestâtem sibi prôrogârî[11] vellet
    [[65]]
  et palam dictitâsset,[1] interêmptô senâtû omnia per plêbem agî
  dêbêre, viam sibi ad rêgnum parâre vidêbâtur. Quârê cum convocâtî
  patrês dêlîberârent quidnam faciendum esset, statim Tiberius      {20}
  Capitôlium petit, manum ad caput referêns, quô sîgnô salûtem
  suam populô commendâbat. Hôc[2] nôbilitâs ita accêpit, quasi
  diadêma pôsceret, sêgniterque cessante cônsule, Scîpiô Nâsîca,
  cum[3] esset cônsôbrînus Tiberiî Gracchî, patriam côgnâtiônî
  praeferêns sublâtâ dextrâ prôclâmâvit: "Quî rem pûblicam salvam   {25}
  esse volunt, mê sequantur!" Dein optimâtês, senâtus atque
  equestris[4] ôrdinis pars mâior in Gracchum inruunt, quî fugiêns
  dêcurrênsque Clîvô Capitôlînô frâgmentô subselliî îctus vîtam,
  quam glôriôsissimê dêgere[5] potuerat, immâtûrâ morte fînîvit.
  Mortuî Tiberiî corpus in flûmen prôiectum est.                    {30}

  [Sidenote: B.C. 123.]

  Gâium Gracchum îdem furor, quî frâtrem, Tiberium, occupâvit.
  Tribûnâtum enim adeptus,[6] seu vindicandae frâternae necis,
  seu comparandae rêgiae potentiae causâ, pessima coepit inîre
  cônsilia: mâximâs largîtiônês fêcit; aerârium[7] effûdit: lêgem dê
  frûmentô plêbî dîvidendô tulit: cîvitâtem[8] omnibus Îtalicîs
      dabat.[9]                                                     {35}
  Hîs Gracchî cônsiliîs quantâ[10] poterant contentiône obsistêbant
    [[66]]
  omnês[1] bonî, in quibus mâximê Pîsô,[2] vir cônsulâris. Is
  cum multa contrâ lêgem frûmentâriam dîxisset, lêge tamen lâtâ
  ad frûmentum cum cêterîs accipiendum vênit. Gracchus ubi
  animadvertit in côntiône Pîsônem stantem, eum sîc compellâvit     {40}
  audiente populô Rômânô: "Quî[3] tibi cônstâs, Pîsô, cum eâ lêge
  frûmentum petâs, quam dissuâsistî?" Cuî Pîsô "Nôlim[4] quidem,
  Gracche" inquit, "mea bona tibi[5] virîtim dîvidere liceat;
  sed sî faciês, partem petam." Quô respônsô apertê dêclârâvit vir  {44}
  gravis et sapiêns lêge, quam tulerat Gracchus, patrimônium pûblicum
  dissipârî.

  [Sidenote: B.C. 121.]

  Dêcrêtum â senâtû est ut[6] vidêret cônsul Opîmius nê quid
  dêtrîmentî rês pûblica caperet: quod nisi in mâximô
  discrîmine dêcernî nôn solêbat. Gâius Gracchus, armâtâ
  familiâ,[7] Aventînum occupâvit. Cônsul, vocâtô ad arma populô,   {50}
  Gâium aggressus est, quî pulsus profûgit et, cum iam[8]
  comprehenderêtur, iugulum servô praebuit, quî dominum et mox sêmet
  ipsum super dominî corpus interêmit. Ut Tiberiî Gracchî anteâ
  corpus, ita Gâiî mîrâ crûdêlitâte victôrum in Tiberim dêiectum
  est. Caput autem â Septimulêiô, amîcô Gracchî, ad Opîmium         {55}
  relâtum aurô[9] repênsum fertur. Sunt[10] quî trâdunt înfûsô[11]
  plumbô eum partem capitis, quô gravius efficerêtur, explêsse.[12]

  Occîsô Tiberiô Gracchô cum senâtus cônsulibus mandâsset, ut
    [[67]]
  in[1] eôs, quî cum Gracchô cônsênserant, animadverterêtur, Blosius
  quîdam, Tiberiî amîcus, prô sê dêprecâtum[2] vênit, hanc, ut[3] sibi
  îgnôscerêtur, causam adferêns, quod tantî[4] Gracchum fêcisset,   {61}
  ut, quidquid ille vellet, sibi faciendum putâret. Tum cônsul
  "Quid?" inquit "sî tê Gracchus templô Iovis in Capitôliô facês
  subdere iussisset,[5] obsecûtûrusne voluntâtî illîus fuissês[5]
  propter istam, quam iactâs, familiâritâtem?" "Numquam" inquit     {65}
  Blosius "voluisset[5] id quidem,[6] sed sî voluisset,[5]
      pâruissem.[5]"
  Nefâria est ea vôx, nûlla enim est excûsâtiô peccâtî, sî amîcî
  causâ peccâveris.

    [Illustration: AMPHORAE]

  Exstat Gâiî Gracchî ê Sardiniâ Rômam reversî ôrâtiô, in quâ       {69}
  cum[7] alia tum[7] haec dê sê nârrat: "Versâtus sum in prôvinciâ,
  quômodo ex[8] ûsû vestrô exîstimâbam esse, nôn quômodo ambitiônî
  meae condûcere arbitrâbar. Nêmô possit vêrê dîcere assem[9]
  aut eô plûs in mûneribus mê
  accêpisse aut meâ causâ quemquam
  sûmptum[10] fêcisse. Zônâs, quâs                                  {75}
  Rômâ proficîscêns plênâs
  argentî[11] extulî, eâs ex prôvinciâ
  inânês rettulî. Aliî amphorâs,
  quâs vînî[11] plênâs extulêrunt, eâs
  argentô[11] replêtâs domum                                        {80}
  reportârunt."

    [Footnotes: XXII (pages 63-67)

    63.6: When two persons of the same name are mentioned together,
    the cognomen is usually put in the plural.
    63.7: Africanus Maior.
    63.8: Her brother was the adoptive father of the younger Scipio
    Africanus. The Gracchi were thus connected with two of the most
    distinguished of the Roman clans, the Cornelian and the Aemilian.
    64.1: #â puerîs#: we say, 'from _childhood_.'
    64.2: 'literature'; abl. of means.
    64.3: 'guest.'
    64.4: #illô saeculô#: temporal abl. We say: 'for that age.' The
    writer of these words was familiar with the extraordinary luxury
    and extravagance that marked the later history of Rome.
    64.5: 'with womanish pride.' A tone of contempt often attaches to
    _mulier_ and its derivatives.
    64.6: construed here like _dônec_, p. 39, n. 9.
    64.7: Cf. p. 28, n. 3.
    64.8: #sed . . . mâluêrunt#: this whole account of the Gracchi was
    manifestly written by one who sympathized with the senatorial or
    aristocratic party. Modern scholars are divided in their
    interpretations of the motives of the Gracchi.
    64.9: The reference is to the _ager pûblicus_, or land gained in
    conquest. It belonged in theory to the state, but the greater part
    of it had fallen into the hands of wealthy capitalists, who,
    though possessing no legal title to the land, yet regarded it as
    their own, and resented any attempt to interfere with their
    occupancy. Meanwhile, the number of small landholders was
    constantly decreasing. These circumstances tended to drive numbers
    of poor people to the cities, especially Rome. The universal
    employment of slave labor aggravated the trouble by shutting the
    poor out from honest labor. Tiberius attempted to remedy these
    evils by limiting the number of acres of the public land which
    might be held by any individual and by distributing the lands thus
    redeemed among the poorer classes.
    64.10: These colonies were intended to aid in relieving the
    distress at Rome by removing part of the population and supplying
    such persons with lands.
    64.11: It was a general rule that no magistrate should hold the
    same office for two successive terms. Thus no man could be
    reëlected consul until ten years after the expiration of the first
    term. When Tiberius, at the end of his year as tribune, presented
    himself for reëlection, the aristocrats appealed to this rule.
    Gracchus might have replied that the rule had often been set aside
    under special circumstances. Still, on the whole, his conduct
    seems to have been unconstitutional.
    65.1: This statement is probably wholly false. As the champions of
    the poor against the rich, the Gracchi were hated by the
    aristocrats, and received no favors at the hands of Roman
    historians.
    65.2: #Hôc . . . pôsceret#: 'The nobles interpreted this to mean
    that he was demanding a kingly crown.' #pôsceret# is subjunctive
    as giving in indirect discourse the thought of the nobles; cf.
    p. 3, n. 6.
    65.3: 'although.'
    65.4: See Vocab., _equestris_ and _eques_.
    65.5: #dêgere potuerat#: 'he might have spent.' Cf. _tuêrî
    poterant_, l. 12.
    65.6: _adipîscor_.
    65.7: #aerârium effûdit#: 'he wasted (the money in) the treasury.'
    The reference is to the corn law mentioned in the next sentence.
    This entitled all citizens residing in Rome to a certain measure
    of corn monthly for less than the market price. The distribution
    was thus a constant drain upon the treasury.
    65.8: 'citizenship.'
    65.9: 'tried to give.' The imperfect tense, like the present,
    often denotes attempted action; cf. _dîvidêbat_, l. 16, and
    _commendâbat_, l. 22. He was unable to carry the law, as the
    citizens of Rome itself were jealous of any extension of the
    franchise. The Italians did not obtain citizenship till 89 B.C.
    65.10: #quantâ . . . contentiône#: 'with the greatest possible
    energy.' Cf. _quantô potuit apparâtû_, IX, 39, and note.
    66.1: #omnês bonî#: 'all loyal citizens.' _bonî_, like
    _optimâtês_, often has this political meaning. Cf. the derivation
    of _aristocracy_.
    66.2: Sc. _obsistêbat_.
    66.3: #Quî . . . cônstâs#: 'How do you explain your conduct?' How
    literally? See (4) _quî_ in vocabulary.
    66.4: #Nôlim#: 'I should hardly desire'; lit. 'I should be
    unwilling.' The subjunctive is often thus used in a modest
    assertion: H 556 (486, N. 1): M 719: A 311, _b_: G 257, 2: B 280,
    1. Cf. _possit_, l. 72. Often, as here, the modesty is assumed
    ironically.
    66.5: Join with #liceat#.
    66.6: #ut . . . caperet#: this was the formula by which the senate
    conferred unlimited power upon the consuls. Explain the
    subjunctives #vidêret# and #caperet#, and give the words of the
    decree as passed by the senate.
    66.7: here 'household.'
    66.8: #iam comprehenderêtur#: 'was on the point of being
    arrested.'
    66.9: #aurô . . . fertur#: 'is said to have been paid for with
    gold.'
    66.10: #Sunt quî trâdunt#: 'there are (those) who relate,' i.e.
    'some say.'
    66.11: #infûsô plumbô#: 'by pouring in lead.' Cf. p. xxiii, K 8.
    It is said that Opimius had promised to pay its weight in gold for
    the head of Gaius.
    66.12: = _explêvisse_.
    67.1: #in eôs . . . animadverterêtur#: 'punishment should be
    visited upon those.'
    67.2: Cf. p. xviii, E 6.
    67.3: #ut . . . îgnôscerêtur#: a result clause, dependent on
    #causam#: 'a reason as a result of which he _ought to be
    pardoned_.' The subjunctive at times expresses necessity or
    obligation and propriety.
    67.4: #tantî . . . fêcisset#: 'he had so highly esteemed
    Gracchus.' #tantî# is a so-called gen. of price or value: H 448, 1
    (405): M 576: A 252, _a_: G 380: B 203, 3. For _fêcisset_, cf.
    p. 14, n. 1.
    67.5: Cf. p. 47, n. 12.
    67.6: #quidem# emphasizes #id#. This emphasis in English would be
    indicated by the stress of the voice, thus: 'he never would have
    dreamed of _that_.' Cf. _Nôlim quidem_ above, l. 42.
    67.7: #cum . . . tum#: 'not only . . . but also.'
    67.8: #ex ûsû vestrô#: 'to your interests.'
    67.9: 'a red cent,' 'a farthing,' as we say.
    67.10: _sûmptum facere_ = 'to be put to expense.'
    67.11: Verbs and adjectives denoting fulness and want are
    construed with either the gen. or the abl., the abl. in reality
    expressing means.]


#XXIII. Gaius Marius# [[stripped text]]

C. Marius, humili loco natus, militiae tirocinium in Hispania duce
Scipione posuit. Erat imprimis Scipioni carus ob singularem virtutem et
impigram ad pericula et labores alacritatem. Cum aliquando inter cenam
Scipionem quidam interrogasset, si quid illi accidisset, quemnam res
publica aeque magnum habitura esset imperatorem, Scipio, percusso
leniter Marii umero, "Fortasse hunc" inquit. Quo dicto excitatus Marius
dignos rebus, quas postea gessit, spiritus concepit.

Q. Metellum in Numidiam contra Iugurtham missum, cuius legatus erat, cum
ab eo Romam missus esset, apud populum Romanum criminatus est bellum
ducere: si se consulem fecissent, brevi tempore aut vivum aut mortuum
Iugurtham se in potestatem populi Romani redacturum. Itaque creatus est
consul et in Metelli locum suffectus. Bellum ab illo prospere coeptum
confecit. Iugurtha ad Gaetulos perfugerat eorumque regem Bocchum
adversus Romanos concitaverat. Marius Gaetulos et Bocchum aggressus
fudit; castellum in excelsa ripa positum, ubi regii thesauri erant, non
sine multo labore expugnavit. Bocchus, bello defessus, legatos ad Marium
misit, pacem orantes. Sulla quaestor, a Mario ad regem remissus, Boccho
persuasit ut Iugurtham Romanis traderet. Iugurtha igitur vinctus ad
Marium deductus est; quem Marius triumphans ante currum egit et in
carcerem caenosum inclusit. Quo cum Iugurtha detracta veste
ingrederetur, os ridentis in modum diduxisse et stupens similisque
desipienti exclamasse fertur: "Pro! quam frigidum est vestrum balneum!"
Paucis diebus post in carcere necatus est.

Marius post bellum Numidicum iterum consul creatus bellumque ei contra
Cimbros et Teutones decretum est. Hi novi hostes, ab extremis Germaniae
finibus profugi, novas sedes quaerebant, exclusique Gallia et Hispania
cum in Italiam remigrarent, a Romanis ut aliquid sibi terrae darent
petierunt. Repulsi, quod nequiverant precibus, armis petere constituunt.
Tres duces Romani impetus barbarorum non sustinuerunt. Omnes fugati,
exuti castris. Actum erat de imperio Romano, nisi Marius fuisset. Hic
primo Teutones sub ipsis Alpium radicibus adsecutus proelio oppressit.
Vallem fluviumque medium hostes tenebant: Romanis aquarum nulla copia.
Aucta necessitate virtus causa victoriae fuit. Nam flagitante aquam
exercitu Marius "Viri" inquit "estis, en illic aquam habetis." Itaque
tanto ardore pugnatum est eaque caedes hostium fuit, ut Romani victores
de cruento flumine non plus aquae biberent quam sanguinis barbarorum.
Caesa traduntur hostium ducenta milia, capta nonaginta. Rex ipse
Teutobochus in proximo saltu comprehensus insigne spectaculum triumphi
fuit: quippe vir proceritatis eximiae super tropaea ipsa eminebat.

Deletis Teutonibus, C. Marius in Cimbros se convertit. Qui cum ex alia
parte Italiam ingressi Athesim flumen non ponte nec navibus, sed
iniectis arborum truncis, velut aggere, traiecissent, occurrit iis C.
Marius. Cimbri legatos ad consulem miserunt, agros urbesque sibi et
fratribus postulantes, Teutonum enim cladem ignorabant. Quaerente Mario
quos illi fratres dicerent, cum Teutones nominassent, ridens Marius
"Omittite" inquit "fratres; tenent hi acceptam a nobis terram
aeternumque tenebunt." Tum legati se ludibrio haberi sentientes ultionem
Mario minati sunt, simul atque Teutones advenissent. "Atqui adsunt"
inquit Marius "nec sane civile foret vos fratribus vestris non salutatis
discedere." Tum vinctos adduci iussit Teutonum duces, qui in proelio
capti erant.

His rebus auditis, Cimbri egrediuntur castris et cum paucis suorum ad
vallum Romanum adequitans Boiorix, Cimbrorum dux, Marium ad pugnam
provocat et diem pugnae a Romanorum imperatore petit. Proximum dedit
consul. Marius cum aciem ita instituisset, ut pulvis in oculos et ora
hostium ferretur, incredibili strage prostrata est illa Cimbrorum
multitudo: caesa traduntur centum octoginta hominum milia. Nec minor cum
uxoribus pugna quam cum viris fuit, cum obiectis undique plaustris,
desuper, quasi e turribus, lanceis contisque pugnarent. Victae tamen cum
missa ad Marium legatione libertatem non impetrassent, suffocatis
elisisque infantibus suis aut mutuis conciderunt vulneribus aut vinculo
e crinibus suis facto ab arboribus pependerunt. Canes quoque defendere,
Cimbris caesis, eorum domos. Marius pro duobus triumphis, qui
offerebantur, uno contentus fuit. Primores civitatis, qui ei aliquamdiu
ut novo homini ad tantos honores evecto inviderant, conservatam ab eo
rem publicam fatebantur. In ipsa acie Marius duas Camertium cohortes,
mira virtute vim Cimbrorum sustinentes contra legem civitate donaverat.
Quod quidem factum et vere et egregie postea excusavit, dicens inter
armorum strepitum verba se iuris civilis exaudire non potuisse.

Illa tempestate primum Romae bellum civile commotum est. Causam bello
dedit C. Marius. Cum enim Sulla consul contra Mithridatem, regem Ponti,
missus fuisset, Sulpicius, tribunus plebis, legem ad populum tulit ut
Sullae imperium abrogaretur, C. Mario bellum decerneretur Mithridaticum.
Qua re Sulla commotus cum exercitu ad urbem venit, eam armis occupavit,
Sulpicium interfecit, Marium fugavit. Marius hostes persequentes fugiens
aliquamdiu in palude delituit. Sed paulo post repertus extractusque, ut
erat nudo corpore caenoque oblitus, iniecto in collum loro Minturnas
raptus et in custodiam coniectus est. Missus est ad eum occidendum
servus publicus, natione Cimber, quem Marius vultus auctoritate
deterruit. Cum enim hominem ad se stricto gladio venientem vidisset
"Tune, homo," inquit "C. Marium audebis occidere?" Quo audito attonitus
ille ac tremens abiecto ferro fugit, Marium se non posse occidere
clamitans. Marius deinde ab iis, qui prius eum occidere voluerant,
e carcere emissus est.

Accepta navicula in Africam traiecit et in agrum Carthaginiensem
pervenit. Ibi cum in locis solitariis sederet, venit ad eum lictor
Sextilii praetoris, qui tum Africam obtinebat. Ab hoc, quem numquam
laesisset, Marius humanitatis tamen aliquod officium exspectabat; at
lictor decedere eum provincia iussit, nisi in se animadverti vellet:
torveque intuentem et vocem nullam emittentem Marium rogavit tandem
ecquid renuntiari praetori vellet? Marius "Abi" inquit, "nuntia vidisse
te Gaium Marium in Carthaginis ruinis sedentem." Duobus clarissimis
exemplis de inconstantia rerum humanarum eum admonebat, cum et urbis
maximae excidium et viri clarissimi casum ante oculos poneret.

Profecto ad bellum Mithridaticum Sulla, Marius revocatus a Cinna in
Italiam rediit, efferatus magis calamitate quam domitus. Cum exercitu
Romam ingressus eam caedibus et rapinis vastavit; omnes adversae
factionis nobiles variis suppliciorum generibus adfecit: quinque dies
continuos totidemque noctes illa scelerum omnium duravit licentia. Hoc
tempore admiranda sane populi Romani abstinentia fuit. Cum enim Marius
occisorum domos multitudini diripiendas obiecisset, inveniri potuit
nemo, qui civili luctu praedam peteret: quae quidem tam misericors
continentia plebis tacita quaedam crudelium victorum vituperatio fuit.
Tandem Marius, senio et laboribus confectus, in morbum incidit et
ingenti omnium laetitia vitam finivit. Cuius viri si examinentur cum
virtutibus vitia, haud facile sit dictu utrum bello melior, an pace
perniciosior fuerit: namque quam rem publicam armatus servavit, eam
primo togatus omni genere fraudis, postremo armis hostiliter evertit.

Erat Marius durior ad humanitatis studia et ingenuarum artium
contemptor. Cum aedem Honoris de manubiis hostium vovisset, spreta
peregrinorum marmorum nobilitate artificumque Graecorum arte, eam
vulgari lapide per artificem Romanum curavit aedificandam. Et Graecas
litteras despiciebat, quod doctoribus suis parum ad virtutem
profuissent. At idem fortis, validus, adversus dolorem confirmatus. Cum
ei varices in crure secarentur, vetuit se adligari. Acrem tamen fuisse
doloris morsum ipse ostendit: nam medico, alterum crus postulanti,
noluit praebere, quod maiorem esse remedii quem morbi dolorem iudicaret.


    [[68]]

  #XXIII. Gâius Marius# [[as printed]]

  C. Marius, humilî locô nâtus,[1] mîlitiae tîrôcinium in Hispâniâ
  duce Scîpiône[2] posuit.[3] Erat imprîmîs Scîpiônî cârus ob
  singulârem virtûtem et impigram[4] ad perîcula et labôrês alacritâtem.
  Cum aliquandô inter cênam Scîpiônem quîdam interrogâsset, sî
  quid illî[5] accidisset, quemnam rês pûblica aequê mâgnum          {5}
  habitûra esset imperâtôrem, Scîpiô, percussô lêniter Mariî umerô,
  "Fortâsse hunc" inquit. Quô dictô excitâtus Marius dîgnôs
  rêbus, quâs posteâ gessit, spîritûs concêpit.

  [Sidenote: B.C. 107.]

  Q. Metellum[6] in Numidiam contrâ Iugurtham missum,[7] cûius
  lêgâtus erat, cum ab eô Rômam missus esset, apud populum          {10}
  Rômânum crîminâtus[8] est bellum dûcere[9]: sî[10] sê cônsulem
  fêcissent, brevî tempore aut vîvum aut mortuum Iugurtham sê in
  potestâtem populî Rômânî redâctûrum. Itaque creâtus est
  cônsul et in Metellî locum suffectus.[11] Bellum ab illô
  prôsperê coeptum cônfêcit. Iugurtha ad Gaetûlôs perfûgerat        {15}
  eôrumque rêgem Bocchum adversus Rômânôs concitâverat. Marius
  Gaetûlôs et Bocchum aggressus fûdit; castellum[12] in excelsâ rîpâ
  positum, ubi rêgiî thêsaurî erant, nôn sine multô labôre expûgnâvit.
  Bocchus, bellô dêfessus, lêgâtôs ad Marium mîsit, pâcem           {19}
  ôrantês.[13] Sulla[14] quaestor, â Mariô ad rêgem remissus, Bocchô
    [[69]]
  persuâsit ut Iugurtham Rômânîs trâderet. Iugurtha igitur
  vinctus ad Marium dêductus est; quem Marius triumphâns ante
  currum êgit et in carcerem[1] caenôsum inclûsit. Quô cum Iugurtha
  dêtrâctâ veste ingrederêtur, ôs rîdentis[2] in modum dîdûxisse
  et stupêns similisque dêsipientî exclâmâsse fertur: "Prô! quam    {25}
  frîgidum est vestrum balneum!" Paucîs diêbus post in carcere
  necâtus est.

    [Illustration {foldout map of Mediterranean}]

    [Illustration: TRIUMPH]

  [Sidenote: B.C. 104.]

  Marius post bellum Numidicum iterum cônsul creâtus bellumque
  eî contrâ Cimbrôs[3] et Teutonês dêcrêtum est. Hî novî
  hostês, ab extrêmîs Germâniae fînibus profugî, novâs sêdês        {30}
  quaerêbant, exclûsîque Galliâ et Hispâniâ cum[4] in Îtaliam
  remigrârent, â Rômânîs ut aliquid sibi terrae darent petiêrunt.
  Repulsî, quod nequîverant[5] precibus, armîs petere cônstituunt.
  Três[6] ducês Rômânî impetûs barbarôrum nôn sustinuêrunt.
    [[70]]
  Omnês fugâtî,[1] exûtî[1] castrîs. Âctum[2] erat dê imperiô Rômânô,
  nisi[3] Marius fuisset. Hîc prîmô Teutonês sub ipsîs Alpium       {36}
  râdîcibus adsecûtus proeliô[4] oppressit. Vallem fluviumque
  medium[5] hostês tenêbant: Rômânîs[6] aquârum nûlla côpia. Aucta
  necessitâte virtûs causa victôriae fuit. Nam flâgitante aquam
  exercitû Marius "Virî[7]" inquit "estis, ên illîc aquam habêtis."
  Itaque tantô ârdôre pûgnâtum est eaque caedês hostium fuit, ut    {41}
  Rômânî victôrês dê cruentô flûmine nôn plûs
  aquae biberent quam sanguinis barbarôrum.
  Caesa trâduntur hostium ducenta mîlia, capta
  nônâgintâ. Rêx ipse Teutobochus in proximô                        {45}
  saltû comprehênsus însîgne spectâculum triumphî
  fuit: quîppe vir prôcêritâtis eximiae
  super tropaea ipsa êminêbat.

    [Illustration: TROPAEUM]

  Dêlêtîs Teutonibus, C. Marius in Cimbrôs sê convertit. Quî
  cum ex[8] aliâ parte Îtaliam ingressî Athesim flûmen nôn ponte    {50}
  nec nâvibus, sed iniectîs[9] arborum truncîs, velut aggere,
  trâiêcissent, occurrit iîs C. Marius. Cimbrî lêgâtôs ad cônsulem
  mîsêrunt, agrôs urbêsque sibi et frâtribus pôstulantês,[10] Teutonum
  enim clâdem îgnôrâbant. Quaerente[11] Mariô quôs illî frâtrês
  dîcerent, cum Teutonês nôminâssent, rîdêns Marius "Omittite[12]"  {55}
  inquit "frâtrês; tenent hî acceptam â nôbîs terram aeternumque
    [[71]]
  tenêbunt." Tum lêgâtî sê lûdibriô[1] habêrî sentientês ultiônem
  Mariô minâtî sunt, simul atque Teutonês advênissent. "Atquî
  adsunt" inquit Marius "nec sânê cîvîle foret vôs frâtribus vestrîs
  nôn salûtâtîs discêdere." Tum vinctôs addûcî iussit Teutonum      {60}
  ducês, quî in proeliô captî erant.

  Hîs rêbus audîtîs, Cimbrî êgrediuntur castrîs et cum paucîs
  suôrum ad vâllum Rômânum adequitâns Boiorix, Cimbrôrum
  dux, Marium ad pûgnam prôvocat et diem pûgnae â Rômânôrum
  imperâtôre petit. Proximum dedit cônsul. Marius cum aciem         {65}
  ita înstituisset, ut pulvis[2] in oculôs et ôra hostium ferrêtur,
  incrêdibilî strâge[3] prôstrâta[4] est illa Cimbrôrum multitûdô: caesa
  trâduntur centum octôgintâ hominum mîlia. Nec minor cum
  uxôribus pûgna quam cum virîs fuit, cum obiectîs undique plaustrîs,
  dêsuper,[5] quasi ê turribus, lanceîs contîsque pûgnârent.        {70}
  Victae tamen cum missâ ad Marium lêgâtiône lîbertâtem[6] nôn
  impetrâssent, suffôcâtîs êlîsîsque[7] înfantibus suîs aut mûtuîs[8]
  concidêrunt vulneribus aut vinculô ê crînibus suîs factô ab[9]
  arboribus pependêrunt. Canês quoque dêfendêre, Cimbrîs caesîs,
  eôrum domôs. Marius prô duôbus triumphîs, quî offerêbantur,       {75}
  ûnô contentus fuit. Prîmôrês cîvitâtis, quî eî aliquamdiû ut[10]
  novô hominî ad tantôs honôrês êvectô[11] invîderant, cônservâtam[12]
  ab eô rem pûblicam fatêbantur. In ipsâ aciê Marius duâs Camertium
  cohortês, mîrâ virtûte vim Cimbrôrum sustinentês[13] contrâ
  lêgem[14] cîvitâte dônâverat. Quod quidem factum et vêrê et       {80}
    [[72]]
  êgregiê posteâ excûsâvit, dîcêns inter armôrum strepitum verba
  sê iûris cîvîlis exaudîre nôn potuisse.

  [Sidenote: B.C. 88.]

  Illâ tempestâte prîmum Rômae bellum cîvîle commôtum est.
  Causam bellô dedit C. Marius. Cum enim Sulla[1] cônsul
  contrâ Mithridâtem,[2] rêgem Pontî, missus fuisset, Sulpicius,    {85}
  tribûnus plêbis, lêgem[3] ad populum tulit ut Sullae imperium
  abrogârêtur, C. Mariô bellum dêcernerêtur Mithridâticum. Quâ rê
  Sulla commôtus cum exercitû ad urbem vênit, eam armîs occupâvit,
  Sulpicium interfêcit, Marium fugâvit. Marius hostês persequentês
  fugiêns aliquamdiû in palûde dêlituit.[4] Sed paulô post          {90}
  repertus extrâctusque, ut erat nûdô corpore caenôque oblitus,[5]
  iniectô in collum lôrô Minturnâs raptus et in cûstôdiam coniectus
  est. Missus est ad eum occîdendum servus[6] pûblicus, nâtiône
  Cimber, quem Marius vultûs auctôritâte dêterruit. Cum enim
  hominem ad sê strictô gladiô venientem vîdisset "Tûne, homô,"     {95}
  inquit "C. Marium audêbis occîdere?" Quô audîtô attonitus ille
  ac tremêns abiectô ferrô fûgit, Marium sê nôn posse occîdere
  clâmitâns. Marius deinde ab iîs, quî prius eum occîdere voluerant,
  ê carcere êmissus est.                                            {99}

  Acceptâ nâviculâ in Âfricam trâiêcit et in agrum Carthâginiênsem
  pervênit. Ibi cum in locîs sôlitâriîs[7] sedêret, vênit ad eum
  lîctor Sextiliî praetôris, quî tum Âfricam obtinêbat. Ab hôc,
  quem[8] numquam laesisset, Marius hûmânitâtis tamen[9] aliquod
    [[73]]
  officium exspectâbat; at lîctor dêcêdere eum prôvinciâ iussit,   {104}
  nisi in sê animadvertî vellet: torvêque intuentem et vôcem nûllam
  êmittentem Marium rogâvit tandem ecquid renûntiârî praetôrî
  vellet? Marius "Abî" inquit, "nûntiâ vîdisse tê Gâium
  Marium in Carthâginis ruînîs sedentem." Duôbus clârissimîs
  exemplîs dê incônstantiâ rêrum hûmânârum eum admonêbat,
  cum et urbis mâximae excidium et virî clârissimî câsum ante      {110}
  oculôs pôneret.

  Profectô ad bellum Mithridâticum Sullâ, Marius revocâtus â
  Cinnâ[1] in Îtaliam rediit, efferâtus magis calamitâte quam domitus.
  Cum exercitû Rômam ingressus eam caedibus et rapînîs             {114}
  vâstâvit; omnês adversae factiônis nôbilês variîs[2] suppliciôrum
  generibus adfêcit: quînque diês continuôs totidemque noctês illa
  scelerum omnium dûrâvit licentia.[3] Hôc tempore admîranda sânê
  populî Rômânî abstinentia fuit. Cum enim Marius occîsôrum        {118}
  domôs multitûdinî dîripiendâs[4] obiêcisset, invenîrî potuit nêmô,
  quî[5] cîvîlî[6] lûctû praedam peteret[5]: quae quidem tam misericors
  continentia plêbis tacita[7] quaedam crûdêlium victôrum vituperâtiô
  fuit. Tandem Marius, seniô et labôribus cônfectus, in morbum     {122}
  incidit et ingentî[8] omnium laetitiâ vîtam fînîvit. Cûius virî sî
  exâminentur cum virtûtibus vitia, haud facile sit dictû[9] utrum
  bellô melior, an pâce perniciôsior fuerit: namque quam rem       {125}
  pûblicam armâtus[10] servâvit, eam prîmô togâtus[10] omnî genere
      fraudis,
  postrêmô armîs hostîliter êvertit.

    [[74]]
  Erat Marius dûrior[1] ad hûmânitâtis[2] studia et ingenuârum[3]
  artium contemptor. Cum aedem Honôris dê manubiîs hostium         {129}
  vôvisset, sprêtâ[4] peregrînôrum marmorum nôbilitâte artificumque
  Graecôrum arte, eam vulgârî lapide[5] per artificem Rômânum
  cûrâvit aedificandam. Et Graecâs litterâs dêspiciêbat, quod[6]
  doctôribus suîs parum ad virtûtem prôfuissent. At îdem fortis,
  validus, adversus dolôrem cônfîrmâtus. Cum eî varicês in crûre
  secârentur, vetuit sê adligârî. Âcrem tamen fuisse dolôris morsum
  ipse ostendit: nam medicô, alterum crûs pôstulantî, nôluit       {136}
  praebêre, quod mâiôrem esse remediî quem morbî dolôrem
  iûdicâret.

    [Footnotes: XXIII (pages 68-74)

    68.1: In 157 B.C., near Arpinum in Latium.
    68.2: Sc. _Âfricânô Minôre_.
    68.3: = _dêposuit_: 'laid aside, completed, served.'
    68.4: #impigram . . . alacritâtem#: 'his energetic eagerness in
    the direction of (#ad#),' etc. = 'his energy and eagerness to
    face,' etc.
    68.5: i.e. Scipio.
    68.6: Subject of #dûcere#, l. 11.
    68.7: = _quî missus erat_. Cf. _coeptum_, l. 15, and p. xxiv, L1.
    68.8: #crîminâtus . . . dûcere#: 'charged him with prolonging.'
    _crîminârî_ is treated here as a verb of saying.
    68.9: = _prôdûcere_, 'prolong.' Simple verbs not infrequently have
    the meanings which are more usually borne by some of their
    compounds. Cf. n. 3 above.
    68.10: #sî . . . redâctûrum#: the words of Marius, reported in
    indir. disc. Cf. p. xxv, M 4, 7.
    68.11: #in . . . suffectus#: 'he was appointed to supersede
    Metellus.' How literally?
    68.12: This fortress lay on the steep, rocky bank of the river
    Malucha, which separated the dominions of Jugurtha and Bocchus.
    68.13: #ôrantês# may be explained (1) as = _quî pâcem ôrâbant_
    (cf. n. 7 above); or (2) as expressing purpose, and so = _quî
    pâcem ôrârent_. In this latter sense, however, the fut. part.
    active is commonly employed, not the present.
    68.14: See next selection.
    69.1: The Tullianum: see illustration on p. 16.
    69.2: 'of one smiling.' Join with #modum#.
    69.3: The Cimbri and Teutones had left their homes in Denmark as
    early as 113 B.C. Having overrun Gaul, they made their way to the
    northern slopes of the Alps, defeating three Roman armies on the
    way (cf. l. 34 below). They did not, however, at once enter Italy,
    but turned off to Spain, whence they were speedily expelled by the
    natives.
    69.4: For the position of #cum#, see p. 19, n. 8.
    69.5: Sc. _petere_, or better _adipîscî_, 'to secure.'
    69.6: Cn. Papirius Carbo, 113; M. Iunius Silanus, 109;
    Q. Servilius Caepio, 105.
    70.1: Sc. _sunt_.
    70.2: #Âctum . . . fuisset#: 'it was all up with the Romans had
    there not been a Marius.' For #erat# we should have expected
    _esset_, since we have an unreal condition; but the indic., the
    mood of fact, is used to show that the ruin of the Romans actually
    was inevitable but for one thing. H 581, 1 (511, 1): M 940: A 308,
    _b_: G 597, 2: B 304, 3.
    70.3: #nisi . . . fuisset#: we would say, 'but for Marius,' or 'if
    it hadn't been for Marius.'
    70.4: in 102, at Aquae Sextiae (now Aix), near Marseilles.
    70.5: 'that ran through (the valley).'
    70.6: dat. of possession with _erat_ (to be supplied). On the
    whole sentence #Vallem . . . côpia#, see p. 5, n. 13.
    70.7: #Virî . . . habêtis#: a rhetorical, but vigorous way of
    saying _Sî virî_ ('true men') _estis_, etc., i.e. the getting of
    water depends wholly on your own courage.
    70.8: 'from a different side' (from that by which the Teutones had
    sought to enter Italy). The Cimbri came through the Brenner Pass
    at the eastern side of the Italian Alps.
    70.9: Sc. _in flûmen_.
    70.10: Cf. p. 68, n. 13.
    70.11: #Quaerente . . . nôminâssent# = two temporal clauses: 'when
    Marius had asked . . . and they had named.'
    70.12: 'Never mind.'
    71.1: #sê . . . habêrî#: 'that they were being mocked.' #lûdibriô#
    is a dat. of purpose: cf. p. 25, n. 6.
    71.2: #pulvis . . . ferrêtur#: cf. XX, lines 7 and 8.
    71.3: at the battle of Vercellae (101), near the modern Milan.
    71.4: _prôsternô_.
    71.5: 'from above,' i.e. from the tops of the wagons.
    71.6: Captives were either killed or sold into slavery.
    71.7: _êlîdô_.
    71.8: #mûtuîs . . . vulneribus#: 'wounds inflicted by each other.'
    71.9: #ab . . . pependêrunt#: 'hung _from_ trees' = 'hanged
    themselves _to_ trees.'
    71.10: #ut . . . hominî#: 'as (i.e. because he was) a new man,'
    i.e. one whose ancestors had never held any state office. Such a
    man was not necessarily of plebeian birth.
    71.11: #êvectô#: 'when he had been elevated.' #eî . . . êvectô#
    may also be rendered 'his elevation.'
    71.12: Sc. _esse_.
    71.13: The part. gives the cause of _dônâverat_.
    71.14: In theory citizenship could be conferred only by action of
    the _comitia tribûta_, or assembly in which the people met by
    tribes.
    72.1: See next selection.
    72.2: Mithridates the Great waged war thrice with the Romans,
    88-84 B.C., 83-81, and 74-66, till finally defeated by Pompey the
    Great. At the time referred to in the text he had overrun Asia
    Minor and had entered Greece.
    72.3: #lêgem . . . tulit#: 'proposed a law before the people,'
    i.e. submitted a proposed law to their votes. The proposal was
    carried. In the civil strife that followed, Sulla led the
    aristocratic, Marius and Cinna the popular party.
    72.4: _dêlitêscô_.
    72.5: _oblinô_.
    72.6: #servus pûblicus#: i.e. a slave owned by the state. Cf. the
    phrase _ager pûblicus_, p. 64, n. 9.
    72.7: Carthage had been destroyed by the Romans in 149 B.C.
    72.8: #quem . . . laesisset# (_laedô_): a causal rel. clause =
    'since he had,' etc.: H 592 (517): M 839: A 320, _e_: G 633:
    B 283, 3.
    72.9: #tamen# looks back to #quî . . . obtinêbat#, l. 102. The
    thought is that Marius hoped for some kindly consideration
    (#hûmânitâtis aliquod officium#) from Sextilius, though his
    official position would naturally constrain him to be hostile to
    an outlaw.
    73.1: L. Cornelius Cinna, leader with Marius of the popular party
    and enemy of Sulla. He was consul 86-84, but was killed by his own
    troops when he ordered them to cross to Greece to fight Sulla, who
    was preparing to return home at the close of the first Mithridatic
    War.
    73.2: #variîs . . . adfêcit#: 'he punished in various ways.'
    73.3: 'lawless reign,' 'wild revel.'
    73.4: Cf. p. 2, n. 18.
    73.5: #quî . . . peteret#: rel. clause of result: H 591, 1
    (503, I): M 838: A 320: G 631: B 283.
    73.6: #cîvîlî lûctû#: 'at the price of (lit. by means of) grief to
    his fellow-citizens.'
    73.7: #tacita . . . fuit#: '(though) unexpressed was in a sense
    (#quaedam#) a criticism,' etc.
    73.8: #ingentî . . . laetitiâ#: 'to the great joy of every one';
    cf. p. 27, n. 3.
    73.9: Join with #facile#, and see p. 19, n. 15.
    73.10: #armâtus# = _bellô_; #togâtus# = _pâce_. Cf. l. 125. The
    toga was the regular dress of civilians.
    74.1: #Erat dûrior ad#: 'He was rather hard as regards,' i.e. 'he
    had no liking for.'
    74.2: 'culture.'
    74.3: #ingenuârum artium#: 'polite accomplishments.'
    74.4: _spernô_.
    74.5: abl. of material: H 470, 1 (415, III): M 610: A 244, _d_:
    G 396, and 3.
    74.6: #quod . . . prôfuissent#: 'because (so he declared) it had
    been of little service to its teachers in the direction of
    (attaining) virtue.' Cf. _quod . . . iûdicâret_, l. 137, and see
    p. 14, n. 1.]


#XXIV. Lucius Cornelius Sulla# [[stripped text]]

138-78 B.C.

Cornelius Sulla cum parvulus a nutrice ferretur, mulier obvia "Salve"
inquit "puer tibi et rei publicae tuae felix," et statim quaesita quae
haec dixisset, nôn potuit inveniri.

Hic bello Iugurthino quaestor Marii fuit. Qui cum usque ad quaesturae
comitia vitam libidine, vino, ludicrae artis amore inquinatam
perduxisset, C. Marius consul moleste tulisse traditur, quod sibi
gravissimum bellum gerenti tam delicatus quaestor sorte obvenisset.
Eiusdem tamen, postquam in Africam venit, virtus enituit. Bello
Cimbrico, legatus consulis bonam operam navavit. Consul ipse deinde
factus, pulso in exsilium Mario, adversus Mithridatem profectus est.
Mithridates enim, Ponticus rex, vir bello acerrimus, virtute eximius,
odio in Romanos non inferior Hannibale, occupata Asia necatisque in ea
omnibus civibus Romanis, quos quidem eadem die atque hora per omnes
civitates interimi iusserat, Europae quoque Italiaeque imminere
videbatur. Ac primo Sulla illius praefectos duobus proeliis in Graecia
profligavit; dein transgressus in Asiam Mithridatem ipsum fudit; et
oppressisset, nisi ad bellum civile adversus Marium festinans
qualemcumque pacem componere maluisset. Mithridatem tamen pecunia
multavit; Asia aliisque provinciis, quas occupaverat, decedere
paternisque finibus contentum esse coegit.

Sulla propter motus urbanos cum victore exercitu Romam properavit; eos,
qui Mario favebant, omnes superavit. Nihil autem ea victoria fuit
crudelius. Sulla, urbem ingressus et dictator creatus, vel in eos, qui
se sponte dediderant, iussit animadverti. Quattuor milia deditorum
inermium civium in Circo interfici iussit. Quis autem illos potest
computare, quos in urbe passim, quisquis voluit, occidit, donec
admoneret Fufidius quidam vivere aliquos debere, ut essent, quibus
imperaret. Novo et inaudito exemplo tabulam proscriptionis proposuit,
qua nomina eorum, qui occidendi essent, continebantur; cumque omnium
orta esset indignatio, postridie plura etiam adiecit nomina. Ingens
caesorum fuit multitudo. Nec solum in eos saevivit, qui armis contra se
dimicavissent, sed etiam quieti animi cives propter pecuniae
magnitudinem proscriptorum numero adiecit. Civis quidam innoxius, cui
fundus in agro Albano erat, cum legens proscriptorum nomina se quoque
videret ascriptum, "Vae" inquit "misero mihi! me fundus Albanus
persequitur." Neque longe progressus a quodam, qui eum agnoverat,
confossus est.

Depulsis prostratisque inimicorum partibus Sulla Felicem se edicto
appellavit, cumque eius uxor geminos eodem tunc partu edidisset, puerum
Faustum puellamque Faustam nominari voluit. Sed paucis annis post
repente contra omnium exspectationem dictaturam deposuit. Dimissis
lictoribus diu in Foro cum amicis deambulavit. Stupebat populus eum
privatum videns, cuius modo tam formidolosa fuerat potestas; quodque non
minus mirandum fuit, privato ei non solum salus, sed etiam dignitas
constitit, qui cives innumeros occiderat. Unus adulescens fuit, qui
auderet queri et recedentem usque ad fores domus maledictis incessere.
Atque ille, cuius iram potentissimi viri maximaeque civitates nec
effugere nec placare potuerant, unius adulescentuli contumelias patienti
animo tulit, id tantum in limine iam dicens: "Hic adulescens efficiet ne
quis posthac tale imperium deponat."

Sulla deinde in villam profectus rusticari et venando vitam agere
coepit. Ibi morbo correptus interiit, vir ingentis animi, cupidus
voluptatum, sed gloriae cupidior; litteris Graecis atque Latinis
eruditus et virorum litteratorum adeo amans, ut sedulitatem etiam mali
cuiusdam poetae aliquo praemio dignam duxerit: nam cum ille epigramma in
eum fecisset eique subiecisset, Sulla statim praemium ei dari iussit,
sed ea lege, ne quid postea scriberet. Ante victoriam laudandus, in iis
vero, quae secuta sunt, numquam satis vituperandus, urbem enim et
Italiam civilis sanguinis fluminibus inundavit. Non solum in vivos
saeviit, sed ne mortuis quidem pepercit: nam Gai Marii, cuius, etsi
postea hostis, aliquando tamen quaestor fuerat, erutos cineres in flumen
proiecit. Qua crudelitate rerum praeclare gestarum gloriam corrupit.


  #XXIV. Lûcius Cornêlius Sulla# [[as printed]]

  138-78 B.C.

  Cornêlius Sulla cum parvulus â nûtrîce ferrêtur, mulier[7] obvia
  "Salvê" inquit "puer tibi et reî pûblicae tuae fêlîx," et statim
  quaesîta[8] quae haec dîxisset, nôn potuit invenîrî.[9]

  [Sidenote: B.C. 107.]

  Hîc bellô Iugurthînô[10] quaestor Mariî fuit. Quî[11] cum[12] ûsque
  ad quaestûrae comitia vîtam libîdine, vînô, lûdicrae[13] artis     {5}
  amôre inquinâtam perdûxisset,[12] C. Marius cônsul molestê
  tulisse trâditur, quod sibi gravissimum bellum gerentî tam dêlicâtus
  quaestor sorte[14] obvênisset. Êiusdem tamen, postquam in
    [[75]]
  Âfricam vênit, virtûs[1] ênituit. Bellô[2] Cimbricô, lêgâtus       {9}
  cônsulis[3] bonam operam nâvâvit. Cônsul ipse deinde factus, pulsô
  in exsilium Mariô, adversus Mithridâtem[4] profectus est. Mithridâtês
  enim, Ponticus rêx, vir bellô âcerrimus, virtûte eximius,
  odiô in Rômânôs nôn înferior Hannibale,[5] occupâtâ Asiâ necâtîsque
  in eâ omnibus cîvibus Rômânîs,[6] quôs quidem eâdem diê
  atque hôrâ per omnês cîvitâtês interimî iusserat, Eurôpae quoque  {15}
  Îtaliaeque imminêre vidêbâtur. Ac prîmô Sulla illîus praefectôs
  duôbus proeliîs[7] in Graeciâ prôflîgâvit; dein trânsgressus in
  Asiam Mithridâtem ipsum fûdit; et oppressisset,[8] nisi ad bellum
  cîvîle adversus Marium fêstînâns quâlemcumque[9] pâcem compônere
  mâluisset.[8] Mithridâtem tamen pecûniâ[10] multâvit; Asiâ[11]    {20}
  aliîsque prôvinciîs,[11] quâs occupâverat, dêcêdere paternîsque
  fînibus contentum esse coêgit.

  [Sidenote: B.C. 82.]

  Sulla propter môtûs urbânôs[12] cum victôre exercitû Rômam
  properâvit; eôs, quî Mariô favêbant, omnês superâvit. Nihil
  autem eâ victôriâ fuit crûdêlius. Sulla, urbem ingressus et       {25}
  dictâtor[13] creâtus, vel in eôs, quî sê sponte dêdiderant, iussit
  animadvertî. Quattuor mîlia dêditôrum inermium cîvium
  in Circô interficî iussit. Quis autem illôs potest computâre, quôs
  in urbe passim, quisquis[14] voluit, occîdit, dônec admonêret Fûfidius
  quîdam vîvere aliquôs dêbêre, ut[15] essent, quibus[15] imperâret.
    [[76]]
  Novô[1] et inaudîtô exemplô tabulam prôscrîptiônis[2] prôposuit,  {31}
  quâ nômina eôrum, quî occîdendî essent, continêbantur; cumque
  omnium orta esset indîgnâtiô, postrîdiê plûra etiam adiêcit nômina.
  Ingêns caesôrum fuit multitûdô. Nec sôlum in[3] eôs saevîvit, quî
  armîs contrâ sê dîmicâvissent, sed etiam quiêtî animî cîvês       {35}
  propter pecûniae mâgnitûdinem prôscrîptôrum numerô adiêcit.
  Cîvis quîdam innoxius, cuî fundus in agrô Albânô erat, cum
  legêns prôscrîptôrum nômina sê quoque vidêret âscrîptum,
  "Vae" inquit "miserô mihi[4]! mê fundus Albânus persequitur."
  Neque[5] longê prôgressus â quôdam, quî eum âgnôverat,            {40}
  cônfossus[6] est.

  [Sidenote: B.C. 78.]

  Dêpulsîs prôstrâtîsque[7] inimîcôrum partibus Sulla Fêlîcem[8] sê
  êdictô appellâvit, cumque êius uxor geminôs eôdem tunc partû
  êdidisset, puerum Faustum[8] puellamque Faustam[8] nôminârî voluit.
  Sed paucîs annîs post repente contrâ omnium exspectâtiônem        {45}
  dictâtûram dêposuit. Dîmissîs lîctôribus diû in Forô cum
  amîcîs deambulâvit. Stupêbat populus eum prîvâtum vidêns,
  cûius modo[9] tam formîdolôsa fuerat potestâs; quodque nôn
  minus mîrandum fuit, prîvâtô eî nôn sôlum salûs, sed etiam dîgnitâs
  cônstitit,[10] quî cîvês innumerôs occîderat. Ûnus adulêscêns     {50}
  fuit, quî[11] audêret querî et recêdentem ûsque ad forês domûs
  maledictîs incessere. Atque ille, cûius îram potentissimî virî
  mâximaeque cîvitâtês nec effugere nec plâcâre potuerant, ûnîus
  adulêscentulî contumêliâs patientî animô tulit, id tantum in[12]
    [[77]]
  lîmine iam dîcêns: "Hîc adulêscêns efficiet[1] nê quis[2] posthâc
  tâle imperium dêpônat."                                           {56}

  Sulla deinde in vîllam profectus rûsticârî et vênandô[3] vîtam
  agere coepit. Ibi morbô correptus interiit, vir ingentis animî,
  cupidus voluptâtum, sed glôriae cupidior; lîtterîs[4] Graecîs atque
  Latînîs êrudîtus et virôrum lîtterâtôrum adeô amâns,[5] ut        {60}
  sêdulitâtem etiam malî cûiusdam poêtae aliquô praemiô dîgnam dûxerit:
  nam cum ille epigramma in eum fêcisset eîque subiêcisset,[6]
  Sulla statim praemium eî darî iussit, sed eâ lêge,[7] nê quid[2]
      posteâ                                                        {63}
  scrîberet. Ante victôriam laudandus,[8] in iîs vêrô, quae secûta
  sunt, numquam[9] satis vituperandus, urbem enim et Îtaliam cîvîlis
  sanguinis flûminibus inundâvit. Nôn sôlum in vîvôs saeviit,       {66}
  sed nê mortuîs quidem pepercit[10]: nam Gâî Mariî, cûius, etsî
  posteâ hostis, aliquandô tamen quaestor fuerat, êrutôs cinerês in
  flûmen prôiêcit. Quâ crûdêlitâte rêrum praeclârê gestârum glôriam
  corrûpit.                                                         {70}

    [Footnotes: XXIV (pages 74-77)

    74.7: #mulier obvia . . . inquit#: 'a woman met them and said.'
    74.8: #quaesîta . . . dîxisset#: 'though inquiries were made as to
    who had said this.' How literally? #dîxisset# is a subjunctive of
    indir. question dependent on #quaesîta#: cf. p. 3, n. 2.
    74.9: Cf. VIII, 43.
    74.10: Cf. XXIII, 20.
    74.11: i.e. Sulla.
    74.12: Cf. p. 13, n. 20.
    74.13: #lûdicrae artis#: 'the sportive art,' i.e. what we would
    call 'the stage,' or 'the drama.' The better classes at Rome
    looked with disfavor on the theater. Since no free Roman was
    allowed to appear upon the stage, the actors were slaves or
    freedmen. The praetor was empowered to flog actors publicly at
    will.
    74.14: After the election of the quaestors their posts were
    assigned to them by lot.
    75.1: 'ability.' It was mainly through Sulla's efforts that
    Jugurtha was captured.
    75.2: Cf. XXIII, 49.
    75.3: Q. Lutatius Catulus, colleague of Marius in 101.
    75.4: Cf. 72, n. 2.
    75.5: abl. of comparison with #înferior#: cf. p. 10, n. 18.
    75.6: This butchery occurred in 88. The number of victims is
    variously stated from 80,000 to 150,000.
    75.7: At Chaeronea and Orchomenus in Boeotia. Both battles were
    fought in 86.
    75.8: Cf. p. 47, n. 12.
    75.9: #quâlemcumque pâcem#: 'peace on any terms.'
    75.10: abl. of the penalty: H 456, 3 (410, III): M 584: A 220,
    _b_: G 378, R. 3: B 208, 2, _b_.
    75.11: Cf. p. 1, n. 6.
    75.12: Cf. XXIII, 113-122.
    75.13: Sulla's dictatorship differed widely from those of former
    times (1) because his was unlimited in time, whereas the old
    dictators held office for six months only; (2) his power extended
    to every department of government, whereas formerly dictators had
    been created to accomplish some _one_ object.
    75.14: #quisquis voluit# contains the subject of #occîdit#.
    75.15: #ut . . . imperâret#: 'that there might be people for him
    (Sulla) to rule over.' For #quibus . . . imperâret#, see p. 5,
    n. 3.
    76.1: #Novô . . . prôposuit#: 'He exposed to public view (in the
    Forum) a proscription list, an unprecedented and unheard of act.'
    #exemplô#: abl. of manner.
    76.2: #prôscrîptiônis#: Latin often uses a gen. where English
    employs an adj. or a noun with adj. value.
    76.3: #in eôs saevîvit#: 'he vented his rage upon those.'
    76.4: ethical dat.: H 432 (389, N. 2): M 541: A 235, _e_: G 351:
    B 188, 2, _b_.
    76.5: #Neque# = _et nôn_, as often at the beginning of clauses.
    76.6: _cônfodiô_.
    76.7: _prôsternô_.
    76.8: These words all = 'Lucky.'
    76.9: 'just now,' 'but a moment before.'
    76.10: 'remained intact.'
    76.11: #quî audêret# is a rel. clause of result = _tâlis ut
    audêret_. It characterizes or describes the antecedent
    #adulêscêns#. See p. 73, n. 5.
    76.12: #in lîmine iam#: 'when he was already at (on) his own
    threshold,' i.e. even the brief comment that he deigned to make
    was not uttered till the last moment.
    77.3: #vênandô . . . coepit#: cf. I, 21, _vênandô . . .
    coepêrunt_, and note.
    77.4: Cf. p. 64, n. 2.
    77.5: #amâns# is treated here as an adj., and so construed with
    the gen. Cf. _cupidus voluptâtum_, l. 59.
    77.6: 'had thrust up from below.' Sulla was sitting on a tribunal
    in the Forum.
    77.7: Cf. p. 11, n. 9.
    77.8: Sc. _erat_.
    77.9: #numquam . . . vituperandus# (_est_): 'can never be blamed
    enough.' In _negative_ sentences the gerundive often conveys this
    idea of possibility. For its other meanings, see p. 39, n. 11.
    77.10: _parcô._]


#XXV. Lucius Lucullus# [[stripped text]]

Lucius Lucullus ingeniô, doctrina, virtute fuit insignis. In Asiam
quaestor profectus ibi per multos annos admirabili quadam laude
provinciae praefuit, deinde absens factus aedilis, continuo praetor,
inde ad consulatum promotus est, quem ita gessit, ut omnes diligentiam
admirarentur, ingenium agnoscerent. Post ad Mithridaticum bellum missus
a senatu non modo opinionem vicit omnium, sed etiam gloriam superiorum
ducum. Idque eo fuit mirabilius, quod ab eo laus imperatoria non admodum
exspectabatur, qui adulescentiam in forensi opera, quaesturae diuturnum
tempus in Asiae pace consumpserat; sed incredibilis quaedam ingenii
magnitudo non desideravit usus disciplinam. Itaque cum totum iter et
navigationem consumpsisset partim in percontando a peritis, partim in
rebus gestis legendis, in Asiam factus imperator venit, cum esset Roma
profectus rei militaris rudis.

Lucullus eo bello magnas ac memorabiles res gessit; Mithridatem saepe
multis locis fudit; Tigranem, regum maximum, in Armenia vicit,
ultimamque bello manum magis noluit imponere, quam non potuit; sed
alioqui per omnia laudabilis et bello paene invictus pecuniae cupidini
nimium deditus fuit; quam tamen ideo expetebat, ut per luxuriam
effunderet. Itaque postquam de Mithridate triumphavit, abiecta omnium
rerum cura coepit delicate ac molliter vivere otioque et luxu diffluere:
magnifice et immenso sumptu villas aedificavit atque ad eorum usum mare
ipsum vexavit. Nam in quibusdam locis moles mari iniecit; in aliis,
suffossis montibus, mare in terras induxit, unde eum haud infacete
Pompeius Xerxem togatum vocare adsueverat.

Habebat Lucullus villam prospectu et ambulatione pulcherrimam. Quo cum
venisset Pompeius, id unum reprehendit, quod ea habitatio esset quidem
aestate peramoena, sed hieme minus commoda videretur; cui Lucullus
"Putasne" inquit "me minus sapere quam hirundines, quae adveniente hieme
sedem commutant?" Villarum magnificentiae respondebat epularum sumptus.
Cum aliquando modica ei, utpote soli, cena esset posita, coquum graviter
obiurgavit, eique excusanti ac dicenti se non debuisse lautum parare
convivium, quod nemo esset ad cenam invitatus, "Quid ais?" inquit iratus
Lucullus. "Nesciebasne Lucullum hodie cenaturum esse apud Lucullum?"

Laudanda est Luculli impensa et studium in libris. Nam et multos et
optimos conquisivit eosque liberaliter dedit utendos. Patebat omnibus
bibliotheca, et in porticus ei adiectas velut ad Musarum aedem veniebant
maxime Graeci tempusque ibi iucunde inter se traducebant ab aliis curis
liberi. Saepe cum iis versabatur Lucullus et inter magnam doctorum
virorum turbam ambulabat.


  #XXV. Lûcius Lûcullus# [[as printed]]

  [Sidenote: B.C. 74.]

  Lûcius Lûcullus ingeniô, doctrînâ, virtûte fuit însîgnis. In
  Asiam quaestor profectus ibi per multôs annôs admîrâbilî quâdam[11]
  laude[12] prôvinciae praefuit, deinde absêns factus[13] aedîlis,
  continuô praetor, inde ad cônsulâtum[14] prômôtus est, quem
  ita gessit, ut omnês dîligentiam admîrârentur, ingenium            {5}
    [[78]]
  âgnôscerent. Post ad Mithridâticum[1] bellum missus â senâtû
  nôn modo opîniônem vîcit[2] omnium, sed etiam glôriam superiôrum
  ducum. Idque eô[3] fuit mîrâbilius, quod ab eô laus[4] imperâtôria
  nôn admodum exspectâbâtur, quî adulêscentiam in forênsî[5] operâ,
  quaestûrae diuturnum tempus in[6] Asiae pâce cônsûmpserat; sed    {10}
  incrêdibilis quaedam[7] ingeniî mâgnitûdô nôn dêsîdêrâvit ûsûs[8]
  dîsciplînam. Itaque cum tôtum iter[9] et nâvigâtiônem cônsûmpsisset
  partim in percontandô â perîtîs,[10] partim in rêbus[11] gestîs
  legendîs, in Asiam factus[12] imperâtor vênit, cum esset Rômâ
  profectus reî mîlitâris rudis.[13]                                {15}

  Lûcullus eô bellô mâgnâs ac memorâbilês rês gessit; Mithridâtem
  saepe multîs locîs fûdit; Tigrânem,[14] rêgum mâximum, in
  Armeniâ vîcit, ultimamque[15] bellô manum magis nôluit impônere,
  quam nôn potuit; sed alioquî per omnia laudâbilis[16] et bellô paene
  invictus pecûniae cupîdinî nimium dêditus fuit; quam tamen        {20}
  ideô expetêbat, ut per lûxuriam effunderet. Itaque postquam
  dê Mithridâte triumphâvit,[17] abiectâ omnium rêrum cûrâ coepit
  dêlicâtê ac molliter vîvere ôtiôque et lûxû diffluere: mâgnificê et
  immênsô sûmptû vîllâs aedificâvit atque ad eôrum ûsum[18] mare
    [[79]]
  ipsum vexâvit. Nam in quibusdam locîs môlês[1] marî iniêcit; in   {25}
  aliîs, suffossîs montibus, mare in terrâs indûxit, unde eum haud
  înfacêtê Pompêius Xerxem togâtum[2] vocâre adsuêverat.[3]

    [Illustration: VÎLLA]

  Habêbat Lûcullus vîllam prôspectû[4] et ambulâtiône pulcherrimam.
  Quô cum vênisset Pompêius, id ûnum reprehendit, quod
  ea habitâtiô esset[5] quidem aestâte peramoena, sed hieme minus   {30}
  commoda vidêrêtur[5]; cuî Lûcullus "Putâsne" inquit "mê minus
  sapere quam hirundinês, quae adveniente hieme sêdem commûtant?"
  Vîllârum mâgnificentiae respondêbat epulârum sûmptus.
  Cum aliquandô modica eî, utpote[6] sôlî, cêna esset posita, coquum
  graviter obiûrgâvit, eîque excûsantî ac dîcentî sê nôn dêbuisse   {35}
  lautum parâre convîvium, quod nêmô esset[5] ad cênam invîtâtus,
    [[80]]
  "Quid ais?" inquit îrâtus Lûcullus. "Nesciêbâsne Lûcullum
  hodiê cênâtûrum esse apud Lûcullum?"

  Laudanda est Lûcullî impênsa et studium in librîs. Nam et         {39}
  multôs et optimôs conquîsîvit eôsque lîberâliter dedit[1] ûtendôs.
  Patêbat omnibus bibliothêca, et in porticûs eî adiectâs velut ad
  Mûsârum[2] aedem veniêbant mâximê Graecî tempusque ibi iûcundê
  inter sê trâdûcêbant ab aliîs cûrîs lîberî. Saepe cum iîs
  versâbâtur Lûcullus et inter mâgnam doctôrum virôrum turbam
  ambulâbat.                                                        {45}

    [Footnotes: XXV (pages 77-80)

    77.1: #efficiet nê . . . dêpônat#: 'will prevent any one from
    resigning.' For the subjunctive #dêpônat#, see p. 9, n. 6.
    77.2: The indefinite pronoun _quis_ occurs chiefly after _sî_,
    _nisi_, _nê_, and _num_. Elsewhere _aliquis_ is used.
    77.11: Cf. p. 76, n. 1.
    77.12: 'ability.'
    77.13: Sc. _est_.
    77.14: The offices mentioned here formed the _cursus honôrum_, or
    official career, through which all desirous of political
    distinction were required to pass. The aedileship, however, might
    be omitted.
    78.1: Cf. p. 72, n. 2. Lucullus assumed command against
    Mithridates in 74 B.C.
    78.2: 'surpassed,' 'outstripped.'
    78.3: causal abl., explained by #quod . . . exspectâbâtur#.
    78.4: 'ability.'
    78.5: #forênsî operâ#: 'legal business,' i.e. the practice of law.
    In or near the Forum were the law courts, as well as business
    places in general.
    78.6: #in Asiae pâce#: 'in Asia, which was then at peace.'
    78.7: #quîdam# is often used, as here, to soften a phrase which
    the writer fears may seem exaggerated.
    78.8: #ûsûs dîsciplînam#: 'the training of experience.'
    78.9: #iter et nâvigâtiônem#: 'voyage.'
    78.10: 'experts.' Sc. #reî mîlitâris#.
    78.11: #rêbus gestîs#: 'history'; here, of course, military
    history especially.
    78.12: Cf. our use of the word 'finished.'
    78.13: The statements in lines 9-15 are untrue, since Lucullus had
    served with distinction under Sulla in the first Mithridatic War.
    78.14: King of Armenia, and son-in-law of Mithridates, with whom
    he had formed alliance.
    78.15: #ultimam . . . potuit#: 'his failure to put the finishing
    touches (#ultimam manum#) to the war was due more to unwillingness
    than to inability.' How literally? Here too the biographer shows
    his prejudice. Lucullus' failure to end the war was due to the
    mutiny of his soldiers, who were weary of their incessant
    exertions, and angry because L. did not permit them to gratify
    their greed for plunder.
    78.16: '(though) praiseworthy.' #invictus# must be similarly
    translated.
    78.17: Cf. p. 18, n. 7.
    78.18: 'convenience.'
    79.1: #môlês . . . iniêcit#: 'he built huge structures out into
    the sea.'
    79.2: Cf. p. 73, n. 10. Xerxes, king of Persia, made an expedition
    against Greece in 480 B.C., in the course of which he executed
    certain important engineering works.
    79.3: _adsuêscô_.
    79.4: #prôspectû . . . pulcherrimam#: 'with a very beautiful view
    and promenade.' #prôspectû# and #ambulâtiône# are abl. of
    specification.
    79.5: Why subjunctive?
    79.6: #utpote sôlî# = _quod sôlus erat_. In phrases like this
    Latin suffers from the lack of a present part. to _sum_.
    80.1: #dedit ûtendôs#: i.e. loaned them. For #ûtendôs#, see p. 2,
    n. 18.
    80.2: The Muses were patrons of literature in its various forms.]


#XXVI. Gnaeus Pompeius Magnus# [[stripped text]]

Gnaeus Pompeius, stirpis senatoriae, bello civili se et patrem consilio
servavit. Cum enim Pompei pater exercitui suo ob avaritiam esset
invisus, facta in eum conspiratione, Terentius quidam, Gnaei Pompei
filii contubernalis, hunc occidendum suscepit, dum alii tabernaculum
patris incenderent. Quae res cum iuveni Pompeio cenanti nuntiata esset,
nihil periculo motus solito hilarius bibit et cum Terentio eadem, qua
antea, comitate usus est. Deinde cubiculum ingressus clam subduxit se
tentorio et firmam patri circumdedit custodiam. Terentius tum destricto
ense ad lectum Pompei accessit multisque ictibus stragula percussit.
Orta mox seditione Pompeius se in media coniecit agmina, militesque
tumultuantes precibus et lacrimis placavit ac duci reconciliavit.

Eodem bello Pompeius partes Sullae secutus ita se gessit ut ab eo maxime
diligeretur. Annos tres et viginti natus, ut Sullae auxilio veniret,
paterni exercitus reliquias conlegit, statimque dux peritus exstitit.
Magnus illius apud militem amor, magna apud omnes admiratio fuit; nullus
ei labor taedio, nulla defatigatio molestiae erat. Cibi vinique
temperans, somni parcus; inter milites corpus exercens cum alacribus
saltu, cum velocibus cursu, cum validis luctando certabat. Tum ad Sullam
iter intendit et in eo itinere tres hostium exercitus aut fudit aut sibi
adiunxit. Quem ubi Sulla ad se accedere audivit egregiamque sub signis
iuventutem aspexit, desiliit ex equo Pompeiumque salutavit imperatorem
et postea ei venienti solebat sella adsurgere et caput aperire et equo
descendere, quem honorem nemini nisi Pompeio tribuebat.

Postea Pompeius in Siciliam profectus est, ut eam a Carbone, Sullae
inimico, occupatam reciperet. Carbo comprehensus et ad Pompeium ductus
est: quem Pompeius, etsi Carbo muliebriter mortem extimescens demisse et
flebiliter mortem deprecabatur, ad supplicium duci iussit. Longe
moderatior fuit Pompeius erga Sthenium, Siciliae cuiusdam civitatis
principem. Cum enim in eam civitatem animadvertere decrevisset, quae
sibi adversata fuisset, inique eum facturum Sthenius exclamavit, si ob
unius culpam omnes puniret. Interroganti Pompeio quisnam ille unus
esset, "Ego" inquit Sthenius "qui cives meos ad id induxi." Tam libera
voce delectatus Pompeius omnibus et Sthenio ipsi pepercit.

Transgressus inde in Africam Iarbam, Numidiae regem, qui Marii partibus
favebat, bello persecutus intra dies quadraginta oppressit et Africam
subegit adulescens quattuor et viginti annorum. Deinde cum litterae ei a
Sulla redditae essent, quibus exercitu dimisso cum una legione
successorem exspectare iubebatur, Pompeius, quamquam aegre id ferebat,
tamen paruit et Romam revertit. Revertenti incredibilis hominum
multitudo obviam ivit; Sulla quoque laetus eum excepit et Magni
cognomine consalutavit. Nihilo minus Pompeio triumphum petenti restitit:
neque vero ea re a proposito deterritus est Pompeius aususque dicere
plures adorare solem orientem quam occidentem: quo dicto innuebat Sullae
potentiam minui, suam crescere. Ea voce audita Sulla, confidentia
adulescentis perculsus, "Triumphet! triumphet!" exclamavit.

Metello iam seni et bellum in Hispania segnius gerenti conlega datus
Pompeius adversus Sertorium vario eventu dimicavit. Maximum ibi in
proelio quodam periculum subiit: cum enim vir vasta corporis magnitudine
impetum in eum fecisset, Pompeius manum amputavit; sed multis in eum
concurrentibus vulnus in femore accepit et a suis fugientibus desertus
in hostium potestate erat. At praeter spem evasit: barbari enim equum
eius auro phalerisque eximiis instructum ceperant. Dum igitur praedam
inter se altercantes partiuntur, Pompeius eorum manus effugit. Altero
proelio cum Metellus Pompeio laboranti auxilio venisset, Sertorius
recedere coactus dixisse fertur: "Nisi anus illa supervenisset, ego hunc
puerum verberibus castigatum Romam dimisissem." Metellum anum
appellabat, quia is, iam senex, ad mollem et effeminatam vitam
deflexerat. Sertorio interfecto Pompeius Hispaniam recepit.

Cum piratae illa tempestate maria omnia infestarent et quasdam etiam
Italiae urbes diripuissent, ad eos opprimendos cum imperio
extraordinario missus est Pompeius. Nimiae viri potentiae obsistebant
quidam ex optimatibus et imprimis Quintus Catulus. Qui cum in contione
dixisset esse quidem praeclarum virum Cn. Pompeium, sed non esse uni
omnia tribuenda, adiecissetque: "Si quid huic acciderit, quem in eius
locum substituetis?" summo consensu succlamavit universa contio, "Te,
Quinte Catule." Tam honorifico civium testimonio victus Catulus e
contione discessit. Pompeius, dispositis per omnes maris recessus
navibus, brevi terrarum orbem illa peste liberavit; praedones multis
locis victos fudit; eosdem in deditionem acceptos in urbibus et agris
procul a mari conlocavit. Nihil hac victoria celerius, nam intra
quadragesimum diem piratas toto mari expulit.

Confecto bello piratico, Gnaeus Pompeius contra Mithridatem profectus in
Asiam magna celeritate contendit. Proelium cum rege conserere cupiebat,
neque opportuna dabatur pugnandi facultas, quia Mithridates interdiu
castris se continebat, noctu vero haud tutum erat congredi cum hoste in
locis ignotis. Nocte tamen aliquando cum Pompeius Mithridatem aggressus
esset, luna magno fuit Romanis adiumento. Quam cum Romani a tergo
haberent, umbrae corporum longius proiectae ad primos usque hostium
ordines pertinebant, unde decepti regii milites in umbras, tamquam in
propinquum hostem, tela mittebant. Victus Mithridates in Pontum
profugit. Pharnaces filius bellum ei intulit, qui, occisis a patre
fratribus, vitae suae ipse timebat. Mithridates a filio obsessus venenum
sumpsit; quod cum tardius subiret, quia adversus venena multis antea
medicamentis corpus firmaverat, a milite Gallo, a quo ut adiuvaret se
petierat, interfectus est.

Tigrani deinde, Armeniae regi, qui Mithridatis partes secutus erat,
Pompeius bellum intulit eumque ad deditionem compulit. Qui cum
procubuisset ad genua Pompei, eum erexit, et benignis verbis recreatum
diadema, quod abiecerat, capiti reponere iussit, aeque pulchrum esse
iudicans et vincere reges et facere. Inde in Iudaeam profectus Romanorum
primus Iudaeos domuit, Hierosolyma, caput gentis, cepit, templumque iure
victoriae ingressus est. Rebus Asiae compositis, in Italiam versus ad
urbem venit, non, ut plerique timuerant, armatus, sed dimisso exercitu,
et tertium triumphum biduo duxit. Insignis fuit multis novis
inusitatisque ornamentis hic triumphus; sed nihil inlustrius visum, quam
quod tribus triumphis tres orbis partes devictae causam praebuerant:
Pompeius enim, quod antea contigerat nemini, primum ex Africa, iterum ex
Europa, tertio ex Asia triumphavit, felix opinione hominum futurus, si,
quem gloriae, eundem vitae finem habuisset neque adversam fortunam esset
expertus iam senex.

Posteriore enim tempore orta inter Pompeium et Caesarem gravi
dissensione, quod hic superiorem, ille parem ferre non posset, bellum
civile exarsit. Caesar infesto exercitu in Italiam venit. Pompeius,
relicta urbe ac deinde Italia ipsa, Thessaliam petit et cum eo consules
senatusque omnis: quem insecutus Caesar apud Pharsalum acie fudit.
Victus Pompeius ad Ptolemaeum, Aegypti regem, cui tutor a senatu datus
erat, profugit, qui Pompeium interfici iussit. Latus Pompei sub oculis
uxoris et liberorum mucrone confossum est, caput praecisum, truncus in
Nilum coniectus. Deinde caput cum anulo ad Caesarem delatum est, qui eo
viso lacrimas non continens illud multis pretiosissimisque odoribus
cremandum curavit.

Is fuit Pompei post tres consulatus et totidem triumphos vitae exitus.
Erant in Pompeio multae et magnae virtutes ac praecipue admiranda
frugalitas. Cum ei aegrotanti praecepisset medicus ut turdum ederet,
negarent autem servi eam avem usquam aestivo tempore posse reperiri,
nisi apud Lucullum, qui turdos domi saginaret, vetuit Pompeius turdum
inde peti, medicoque dixit: "Ergo, nisi Lucullus perditus deliciis
esset, non viveret Pompeius?" Aliam avem, quae parabilis esset, sibi
iussit apponi.

Viris doctis magnum honorem habebat Pompeius. Ex Syria decedens,
confecto bello Mithridatico, cum Rhodum venisset, Posidonium cupiit
audire; sed cum audivisset eum graviter esse aegrum, quod vehementer
eius artus laborarent, voluit tamen nobilissimum philosophum visere. Mos
erat ut, consule aedes aliquas ingressuro, lictor fores percuteret,
admonens consulem adesse, at Pompeius fores Posidonii percuti honoris
causa vetuit. Quem ut vidit et salutavit, moleste se dixit ferre, quod
eum non posset audire. At ille "Tu vero" inquit "potes, nec committam ut
dolor corporis efficiat ut frustra tantus vir ad me venerit." Itaque
cubans graviter et copiose de hoc ipso disputavit: nihil esse bonum nisi
quod honestum esset, nihil malum dici posse, quod turpe non esset. Cum
vero dolores acriter eum pungerent, saepe "Nihil agis," inquit "dolor!
quamvis sis molestus, numquam te esse malum confitebor."


  #XXVI. Gnaeus Pompêius Mâgnus# [[as printed]]

    [Illustration: POMPEY]

  Gnaeus Pompêius,[3] stirpis senâtôriae, bellô[4]
  cîvîlî sê et patrem cônsiliô servâvit. Cum enim
  Pompêî pater exercituî suô ob avâritiam esset
  invîsus, factâ in eum cônspîrâtiône, Terentius
  quîdam, Gnaeî Pompêî fîliî[5] contubernâlis, hunc[6]               {5}
  occîdendum suscêpit, dum[7] aliî tabernâculum
  patris incenderent.[7] Quae rês cum iuvenî Pompêiô
  cênantî nûntiâta esset, nihil perîculô môtus
  solitô[8] hilarius bibit et cum Terentiô eâdem,
  quâ[9] anteâ, cômitâte ûsus est. Deinde cubiculum ingressus clam  {10}
  subdûxit sê tentôriô et fîrmam patrî circumdedit cûstôdiam.
  Terentius tum dêstrictô ênse ad lectum Pompêî accessit multîsque
  îctibus strâgula percussit.[10] Ortâ mox sêditiône Pompêius sê in
    [[81]]
  media coniêcit âgmina, mîlitêsque tumultuantês precibus et lacrimîs
  plâcâvit ac ducî reconciliâvit.                                   {15}

  Eôdem bellô Pompêius partês Sullae secûtus ita sê gessit ut ab
  eô mâximê dîligerêtur. Annôs três et vîgintî nâtus, ut Sullae
  auxiliô venîret, paternî exercitûs reliquiâs conlêgit, statimque
  dux perîtus exstitit.[1] Mâgnus illîus apud mîlitem amor, mâgna
  apud omnês admîrâtiô fuit; nûllus eî[2] labor taediô,[2] nûlla
      dêfatîgâtiô                                                   {20}
  molestiae[2] erat. Cibî[3] vînîque[3] temperâns, somnî parcus[4];
  inter mîlitês corpus exercêns cum alacribus saltû,[5] cum vêlôcibus
  cursû,[5] cum validîs luctandô[5] certâbat. Tum ad Sullam iter
  intendit et in eô itinere três hostium exercitûs aut fûdit aut sibi
  adiûnxit. Quem ubi Sulla ad sê accêdere audîvit êgregiamque       {25}
  sub sîgnîs iuventûtem âspexit, dêsiliit ex equô Pompêiumque
  salûtâvit imperâtôrem et posteâ eî[6] venientî solêbat sellâ
  adsurgere et caput aperîre et equô dêscendere, quem honôrem nêminî
  nisi Pompêiô tribuêbat.

  Posteâ Pompêius in Siciliam profectus est, ut eam â Carbône,      {30}
  Sullae inimîcô, occupâtam reciperet. Carbô comprehênsus et ad
  Pompêium ductus est: quem Pompêius, etsi Carbô[7] muliebriter
  mortem extimêscêns dêmissê et flêbiliter mortem dêprecâbâtur,
  ad supplicium dûcî iussit. Longê moderâtior fuit Pompêius ergâ
  Sthenium, Siciliae cûiusdam cîvitâtis prîncipem. Cum enim in      {35}
  eam cîvitâtem animadvertere dêcrêvisset, quae[8] sibi adversâta
  fuisset, inîquê eum factûrum Sthenius exclâmâvit,[9] sî ob ûnîus
  culpam omnês pûnîret. Interrogantî Pompêiô quisnam ille ûnus
  esset, "Ego" inquit Sthenius "quî cîvês meôs ad id indûxî."
    [[82]]
  Tam lîberâ vôce dêlectâtus Pompêius omnibus et Stheniô ipsî       {40}
  pepercit.[1]

  Trânsgressus inde in Âfricam Iarbam, Numidiae rêgem, quî
  Mariî partibus favêbat, bellô persecûtus intrâ diês quadrâgintâ
  oppressit et Âfricam subêgit adulêscêns[2] quattuor et vîgintî
  annôrum. Deinde cum litterae eî â Sullâ redditae essent, quibus   {45}
  exercitû[3] dîmissô cum ûnâ legiône successôrem exspectâre
  iubêbâtur, Pompêius, quamquam aegrê id ferêbat, tamen pâruit et
  Rômam revertit. Revertentî incrêdibilis hominum multitûdô
  obviam îvit; Sulla quoque laetus eum excêpit et Mâgnî
  côgnômine cônsalûtâvit. Nihilô minus Pompêiô triumphum petentî    {50}
  restitit: neque vêrô eâ rê â prôpositô dêterritus est Pompêius
  aususque[4] dîcere plûrês adôrâre sôlem orientem quam occidentem:
  quô dictô innuêbat Sullae potentiam minuî, suam crêscere.
  Eâ vôce audîtâ Sulla, cônfîdentiâ adulêscentis perculsus,[5]
  "Triumphet! triumphet!" exclâmâvit.                               {55}

  Metellô[6] iam senî[7] et bellum in Hispâniâ sêgnius gerentî
  conlêga datus Pompêius adversus Sertôrium variô êventû dîmicâvit.
  Mâximum ibi in proeliô quôdam perîculum subiit: cum enim vir
  vâstâ corporis mâgnitûdine impetum in eum fêcisset, Pompêius
  manum amputâvit; sed multîs[8] in eum concurrentibus vulnus in    {60}
  femore accêpit et â suîs fugientibus dêsertus in[9] hostium potestâte
  erat. At praeter spem êvâsit: barbarî enim equum êius aurô
  phalerîsque eximiîs înstrûctum cêperant. Dum igitur praedam
  inter sê altercantês[10] partiuntur, Pompêius eôrum manûs effûgit.
  Alterô proeliô cum Metellus Pompêiô labôrantî auxiliô vênisset,   {65}
  Sertôrius recêdere coâctus dîxisse fertur: "Nisi anus illa
    [[83]]
  supervênisset,[1] ego hunc puerum verberibus castîgâtum Rômam
  dîmîsissem."[1] Metellum anum appellâbat, quia is, iam senex,[2] ad
  mollem et effêminâtam vîtam dêflexerat. Sertôriô interfectô
  Pompêius Hispâniam recêpit.                                       {70}

  [Sidenote: B.C. 67.]

  Cum[3] pîrâtae illâ tempestâte
  maria omnia înfêstârent[3] et quâsdam
  etiam Îtaliae urbês dîripuissent,[3]
  ad eôs opprimendôs
  cum imperiô extraôrdinâriô                                        {75}
  missus est Pompêius. Nimiae
  virî potentiae obsistêbant quîdam
  ex optimâtibus et imprîmîs Quîntus Catulus. Quî cum in côntiône
  dîxisset esse quidem[4] praeclârum virum Cn. Pompêium, sed[4] nôn
  esse ûnî omnia tribuenda, adiêcissetque: "Sî quid huîc acciderit,
  quem in êius locum substituêtis?" summô cônsênsû succlâmâvit      {81}
  ûniversa côntiô, "Tê, Quînte Catule." Tam honôrificô cîvium
  têstimôniô victus Catulus ê côntiône discessit. Pompêius,
  dispositîs[5] per omnês maris recessûs nâvibus, brevî terrârum orbem
  illâ pêste lîberâvit; praedônês multîs locîs victôs fûdit; eôsdem
  in dêditiônem acceptôs in urbibus et agrîs procul â marî          {86}
  conlocâvit. Nihil hâc victôriâ celerius, nam intrâ quadrâgêsimum
  diem pîrâtâs tôtô marî expulit.

    [Illustration: NÂVIS PÎRÂTA]

  [Sidenote: B.C. 66.]

  Cônfectô bellô pîrâticô, Gnaeus Pompêius contrâ Mithridâtem
  profectus in Asiam mâgnâ celeritâte contendit. Proelium           {90}
  cum rêge cônserere cupiêbat, neque[6] opportûna dabâtur
  pûgnandî facultâs, quia Mithridâtês interdiû castrîs sê continêbat,
  noctû vêrô haud tûtum erat congredî cum hoste in locîs îgnôtîs.
  Nocte tamen aliquandô cum Pompêius Mithridâtem aggressus
  esset, lûna mâgnô fuit Rômânîs adiûmentô. Quam cum Rômânî         {95}
    [[84]]
  â[1] tergô habêrent, umbrae corporum longius prôiectae ad prîmôs
  ûsque hostium ôrdinês pertinêbant, unde dêceptî rêgiî mîlitês in
  umbrâs, tamquam in propinquum hostem, têla mittêbant. Victus
  Mithridâtês in Pontum profûgit. Pharnacês fîlius bellum eî        {99}
  intulit, quî, occîsîs â patre frâtribus, vîtae suae ipse timêbat.
  Mithridâtês â fîliô obsessus[2] venênum sûmpsit; quod cum tardius
  subîret, quia adversus venêna multîs anteâ medicâmentîs corpus
  fîrmâverat, â mîlite Gallô, â[3] quô ut adiuvâret sê petierat,
  interfectus est.

    [Illustration: DIADÊMA]

  [Sidenote: B.C. 63.]

  Tigrânî deinde, Armeniae rêgî, quî Mithridâtis partês secûtus    {105}
  erat, Pompêius bellum intulit eumque ad dêditiônem compulit.
  Quî cum prôcubuisset ad genua Pompêî, eum
  êrêxit,[4] et benîgnîs verbîs recreâtum diadêma,
  quod abiêcerat, capitî repônere iussit, aequê[5]
  pulchrum esse iûdicâns et vincere rêgês et                       {110}
  facere. Inde in Iûdaeam profectus Rômânôrum
  prîmus[6] Iûdaeôs domuit, Hierosolyma,
  caput gentis, cêpit, templumque iûre[7]
  victôriae ingressus est. Rêbus Asiae                             {114}
  compositîs, in Italiam versus[8] ad urbem[9] vênit, nôn, ut plêrîque
  timuerant, armâtus, sed dîmissô exercitû, et tertium triumphum
  bîduô[10] dûxit. Însîgnis fuit multîs novîs inûsitâtîsque ôrnâmentîs
  hîc triumphus; sed nihil inlûstrius vîsum, quam quod[11] tribus
  triumphîs três orbis partês dêvictae causam praebuerant: Pompêius
    [[85]]
  enim, quod[1] anteâ contigerat nêminî, prîmum ex Âfricâ,         {120}
  iterum ex Eurôpâ, tertiô ex Asiâ triumphâvit, fêlîx opîniône
  hominum futûrus, sî, quem[2] glôriae, eundem vîtae fînem habuisset
  neque adversam fortûnam esset expertus iam senex.

  [Sidenote: B.C. 49.]

  Posteriôre enim tempore ortâ inter Pompêium et Caesarem[3]
  gravî dissênsiône, quod[4] hîc[5] superiôrem, ille[5] parem ferre
  nôn posset, bellum cîvîle exârsit. Caesar înfêstô[6] exercitû    {126}
  in Îtaliam vênit. Pompêius, relîctâ urbe ac deinde Îtaliâ ipsâ,
  Thessaliam petit et cum eô cônsulês senâtusque omnis: quem
  însecûtus Caesar apud Pharsâlum aciê fûdit. Victus Pompêius
  ad Ptolemaeum, Aegyptî rêgem, cuî tûtor â senâtû datus erat,     {130}
  profûgit, quî Pompêium interficî iussit. Latus Pompêî sub oculîs
  uxôris et lîberôrum mûcrône cônfossum est, caput praecîsum,
  truncus in Nîlum coniectus. Deinde caput cum ânulô ad Caesarem
  dêlâtum est, quî eô vîsô lacrimâs nôn continêns illud
  multîs pretiôsissimîsque odôribus cremandum cûrâvit.             {135}

  Is fuit Pompêî post três cônsulâtûs et totidem triumphôs vîtae
  exitus. Erant in Pompêiô multae et mâgnae virtûtês ac praecipuê
  admîranda frûgâlitâs. Cum eî aegrôtantî praecêpisset
  medicus ut turdum ederet, negârent autem[7] servî eam avem
  ûsquam aestîvô tempore posse reperîrî, nisi apud Lûcullum, quî   {140}
  turdôs domî sagînâret, vetuit Pompêius turdum inde petî, medicôque
  dîxit: "Ergô,[8] nisi Lûcullus perditus dêliciîs esset, nôn
  vîveret Pompêius?" Aliam avem, quae parâbilis esset, sibi iussit
  appônî.

    [[86]]
  Virîs[1] doctîs mâgnum honôrem habêbat Pompêius. Ex Syriâ        {145}
  dêcêdêns, cônfectô bellô Mithridâticô, cum Rhodum vênisset,
  Posîdônium cupiit audîre[2]; sed cum audîvisset eum graviter esse
  aegrum, quod[3] vehementer êius artûs labôrârent, voluit tamen
  nôbilissimum philosophum vîsere. Môs erat ut, cônsule[4] aedês   {149}
  aliquâs ingressûrô, lîctor forês percuteret,[5] admonêns cônsulem
  adesse, at Pompêius forês Posîdôniî percutî honôris causâ vetuit.
  Quem ut vîdit et salûtâvit, molestê sê dîxit ferre, quod eum nôn
  posset audîre. At ille "Tû vêrô" inquit "potes, nec committam
  ut dolor corporis efficiat[5] ut frûstrâ tantus vir ad mê vênerit.[5]"
  Itaque cubâns graviter et côpiôsê dê hôc ipsô disputâvit: nihil  {155}
  esse[6] bonum nisi quod honestum esset, nihil malum dîcî posse,
  quod turpe nôn esset. Cum vêrô dolôrês âcriter eum pungerent,
  saepe "Nihil agis," inquit "dolor! quamvîs[7] sîs molestus, numquam
  tê esse malum cônfitêbor."

    [Footnotes: XXVI (pages 80-86)

    80.3: See Vocab., _Pompêius_.
    80.4: The reference is to the war between Marius and Sulla. See
    selections XXIV and XXV.
    80.5: Cf. _iuvenî_, l. 7. We should say 'the younger.' He was at
    this time but nineteen years of age.
    80.6: #hunc . . . suscêpit#: 'undertook to kill him.' How
    literally? For #occîdendum#, see p. 2, n. 18.
    80.7: #dum#, though meaning 'while' (cf. p. xx, G 2), takes the
    subjunctive here because of the informal indir. disc. Terenti
    said: _fîlium . . . suscipiam dum aliî incenditis_.
    80.8: #solitô hilarius#: 'with (even) more gaiety than usual.'
    #solitô# is here a noun. Neuter adj. and part. are often so used.
    For its case, see p. 10, n. 18.
    80.9: #quâ anteâ#: sc. _ûsus erat_.
    80.10: _percutiô_.
    81.1: 'proved himself.'
    81.2: See p. 25, n. 6.
    81.3: objective gen. (p. 14, n. 15) with the part. #temperâns#,
    which here = a simple adj. So #somnî# is obj. gen. with #parcus#.
    81.4: Sc. _erat_.
    81.5: abl. of specification.
    81.6: #eî venientî#: '(as a mark of respect) to him when
    approaching.' #eî# is a dat. of advantage with #adsurgere#.
    81.7: After #quem#, whose antecedent is #Carbô#, l. 31, this word
    might have been omitted without loss of clearness. In fact, such
    omission is the more usual construction.
    81.8: #quae . . . fuisset#: causal. Note that in forming the
    pluperfect subjunctive certain writers often use _fuisset_ for
    _esset_.
    81.9: What were the exact words of Sthenius?
    82.1: _parcô_.
    82.2: '(being then) a young man.' Cf. p. 44, n. 12.
    82.3: #exercitû dîmissô . . . exspectâre# = _exercitum dîmittere
    et . . . exspectâre_.
    82.4: Cf. p. 13, n. 12.
    82.5: _percellô_.
    82.6: Quintus Caecilius Metellus, proconsul in Spain 79-76 B.C.
    82.7: #senî#: 'because he was old.'
    82.8: #multîs . . . concurrentibus#: the abl. abs. here denotes
    both time and cause; see p. xxiii, K 6. The prefix in
    #concurrentibus# conveys the idea of 'from every side.'
    82.9: #in . . . erat# = _ab hostibus captus est_.
    82.10: #altercantês partiuntur#: lit., 'wrangling they divided' =
    'they wrangled about the division.'
    83.1: Why subjunctive?
    83.2: '_though_ already old.' The thought is that luxury and
    effeminacy are especially unbecoming to old age.
    83.3: See p. xx, H 2. What is the meaning of the change of tense
    in #dîripuissent#?
    83.4: Cf. p. 10, n. 10.
    83.5: See p. xxiii, K 10.
    83.6: #neque . . . facultâs#: 'but no opportunity,' etc.
    84.1: #â tergô#: 'in the rear.' See p. 11, n. 10.
    84.2: _obsideô_.
    84.3: #â quô . . . petierat#: 'whom he had asked to help him.' How
    literally? #ut adiuvâret sê# is a substantive clause of purpose
    and object of _petierat_. See p. 7, n. 20.
    84.4: _êrigô_.
    84.5: #aequê . . . facere#: lit., 'because he thought it an
    equally fine thing both to conquer kings and to create them.' The
    expression is somewhat careless. We would say: 'as glorious to
    create kings as to conquer them.' #aequê pulchrum# is predicate,
    #et vincere . . . et facere# subject to #esse#.
    84.6: #prîmus . . . domuit#: cf. p. 38, n. 1.
    84.7: #iûre victôriae#: 'by right of (i.e. on the strength of) his
    victory.'
    84.8: 'turning'; lit., 'having turned himself.' Cf. n. on
    _cingitur_, XIII, l. 29.
    84.9: 'the City,' i.e. Rome.
    84.10: Cf. p. xvii, D 1.
    84.11: #quod . . . praebuerant#: 'the fact that the conquest of
    (the) three parts,' etc. Cf. p. 5, n. 15, and p. xxiv, L 4.
    85.1: 'something which'; its antecedent is the clause #prîmum
    . . . triumphâvit# below.
    85.2: With #quem glôriae#, sc. _fînem habuit_.
    85.3: The famous C. Julius Caesar, for whom see next selection.
    85.4: #quod . . . posset#: 'because (as men said) the one,' etc.
    For the subjunctive, see p. xxi, H 4.
    85.5: #hîc . . . ille#: 'the one (Caesar) . . . the other
    (Pompey).'
    85.6: #înfêstô exercitû#: abl. of accompaniment: H 474, 2, N. 1
    (419, III, 1, 1): M 634: A 243, _a_, N.: G 392, R. 1: B 222, 1.
    85.7: #autem# contrasts #negârent# with #praecêpisset#. There is a
    contrast also between #servî# and #medicus#.
    85.8: #Ergô . . . Pompêius#? The force of this sentence can be
    given only by a free rendering, thus: 'Shall it be said, then,
    that Pompey would not be alive, had not Lucullus ruined himself by
    his luxury?'
    86.1: #Virîs . . . habêbat#: 'he highly honored learned men.'
    86.2: _audiô_, like our 'hear,' is often used of listening to
    lectures or to teachers.
    86.3: #quod . . . labôrârent#: i.e. because he had the gout.
    86.4: #cônsule . . . ingressûrô#: 'whenever the consul,' etc.;
    a temporal abl. abs.
    86.5: Subjunctive in substantive clauses of result: see p. xix,
    F 3.
    86.6: infinitive, because the clause in which it stands is in
    apposition to #hôc#. This use of the infin. is common.
    86.7: #quamvîs sîs#: concessive subjunctive: H 586, II (515, III):
    M 875: A 313, _a_: G 606: B 308.]


#XXVII. Gaius Iulius Caesar# [[stripped text]]

C. Iulius Caesar, nobilissima Iuliorum genitus familia, annum agens
sextum et decimum patrem amisit. Corneliam, Cinnae filiam, duxit uxorem;
cuius pater cum esset Sullae inimicissimus, is Caesarem voluit
compellere ut eam repudiaret; neque id potuit efficere. Qua re Caesar
bonis spoliatus cum etiam ad necem quaereretur, mutata veste nocte urbe
elapsus est et quamquam tunc quartanae morbo laborabat, prope per
singulas noctes latebras commutare cogebatur; et comprehensus a Sullae
liberto, ne ad Sullam perduceretur, vix data pecunia evasit. Postremo
per propinquos et adfines suos veniam impetravit. Satis constat Sullam,
cum deprecantibus amicissimis et ornatissimis viris aliquamdiu
denegasset atque illi pertinaciter contenderent, expugnatum tandem
proclamasse, vincerent, dummodo scirent eum, quem incolumem tanto opere
cuperent, aliquando optimatium partibus, quas secum simul defendissent,
exitio futurum; nam Caesari multos Marios inesse.

Stipendia prima in Asia fecit. In expugnatione Mitylenarum corona civica
donatus est. Mortuo Sulla, Rhodum secedere statuit, ut per otium
Apollonio Moloni, tunc clarissimo dicendi magistro, operam daret. Huc
dum traicit, a praedonibus captus est mansitque apud eos prope
quadraginta dies. Per omne autem illud spatium ita se gessit, ut piratis
pariter terrori venerationique esset. Comites interim servosque ad
expediendas pecunias, quibus redimeretur, dimisit. Viginti talenta
piratae postulaverant: ille quinquaginta daturum se spopondit. Quibus
numeratis cum expositus esset in litore, confestim Miletum, quae urbs
proxime aberat, properavit ibique contracta classe invectus in eum
locum, in quo ipsi praedones erant, partem classis fugavit, partem
mersit, aliquot naves cepit piratasque in potestatem redactos eo
supplicio, quod illis saepe minatus inter iocum erat, adfecit crucique
suffixit.

Quaestori ulterior Hispania obvenit. Quo profectus cum Alpes transiret
et ad conspectum pauperis cuiusdam vici comites per iocum inter se
disputarent num illic etiam esset ambitioni locus, serio dixit Caesar
malle se ibi primum esse, quam Romae secundum. Dominationis avidus
a prima aetate regnum concupiscebat semperque in ore habebat hos
Euripidis, Graeci poetae, versus:

  Nam si violandum est ius, regnandi gratia
  Violandum est. Aliis rebus pietatem colas.

Cumque Gades, quod est Hispaniae oppidum, venisset, animadversa apud
Herculis templum magni Alexandri imagine ingemuit et quasi pertaesus
ignaviam suam, quod nihildum a se memorabile actum esset in ea aetate,
qua iam Alexander orbem terrarum subegisset, missionem continuo
efflagitavit ad captandas quam primum maiorum rerum occasiones in urbe.

Aedilis praeter comitium ac Forum etiam Capitolium ornavit porticibus.
Venationes autem ludosque et cum conlega M. Bibulo et separatim edidit:
quo factum est ut communium quoque impensarum solus gratiam caperet. His
autem rebus patrimonium effudit tantumque conflavit aes alienum, ut ipse
diceret sibi opus esse millies sestertium, ut haberet nihil.

Consul deinde creatus cum M. Bibulo, societatem cum Gnaeo Pompeio et
Marco Crasso iunxit Caesar, ne quid ageretur in re publica, quod
displicuisset ulli ex tribus. Deinde legem tulit ut ager Campanus plebi
divideretur. Cui legi cum senatus repugnaret, rem ad populum detulit.
Bibulus conlega in Forum venit, ut legi obsisteret, sed tanta in eum
commota est seditio, ut in caput eius cophinus stercore plenus
effunderetur fascesque ei frangerentur atque adeo ipse armis Foro
expelleretur. Qua re cum Bibulus per reliquum anni tempus domo abditus
Curia abstineret, unus ex eo tempore Caesar omnia in re publica ad
arbitrium administrabat, ut nonnulli urbanorum, si quid testandi gratia
signarent, per iocum non, ut mos erat, 'consulibus Caesare et
Bibulo' actum scriberent, sed 'Iulio et Caesare,' unum consulem nomine
et cognomine pro duobus appellantes.

Functus consulatu Caesar Galliam provinciam accepit. Gessit autem novem
annis, quibus in imperio fuit, haec fere: Galliam in provinciae formam
redegit; Germanos, qui trans Rhenum incolunt, primus Romanorum ponte
fabricato aggressus maximis adfecit cladibus. Aggressus est Britannos,
ignotos antea, superatisque pecunias et obsides imperavit. Hic cum multa
Romanorum militum insignia narrantur, tum illud egregium ipsius
Caesaris, quod, nutante in fugam exercitu, rapto fugientis e manu scuto
in primam volitans aciem proelium restituit. Idem alio proelio legionis
aquiliferum ineundae fugae causa iam conversum faucibus comprehensum in
contrariam partem detraxit dextramque ad hostem tendens "Quorsum tu"
inquit "abis? Illic sunt, cum quibus dimicamus." Qua adhortatione omnium
legionum trepidationem correxit vincique paratas vincere docuit.

Interfecto interea apud Parthos Crasso et defuncta Iulia, Caesaris
filia, quae, nupta Pompeio, generi socerique concordiam tenebat, statim
aemulatio erupit. Iam pridem Pompeio suspectae Caesaris opes et Caesari
Pompeiana dignitas gravis, nec hic ferebat parem, nec ille superiorem.
Itaque cum Caesar in Gallia detineretur, et, ne imperfecto bello
discederet, postulasset ut sibi liceret, quamvis absenti, alterum
consulatum petere, a senatu, suadentibus Pompeio eiusque amicis, negatum
ei est. Hanc iniuriam acceptam vindicaturus in Italiam rediit et
bellandum ratus cum exercitu Rubiconem flumen, qui provinciae eius finis
erat, transiit. Hoc ad flumen paulum constitisse fertur ac reputans
quantum moliretur, conversus ad proximos, "Etiamnunc" inquit "regredi
possumus; quod si ponticulum transierimus, omnia armis agenda erunt."
Postremo autem "Iacta alea esto!" exclamans exercitum traici iussit
plurimisque urbibus occupatis Brundisium contendit, quo Pompeius
consulesque confugerant.

Qui cum inde in Epirum traiecissent, Caesar, eos secutus a Brundisio,
Dyrrachium inter oppositas classes gravissima hieme transmisit;
copiisque quas subsequi iusserat diutius cessantibus, cum ad eas
arcessendas frustra misisset, mirae audaciae facinus edidit. Morae enim
impatiens castris noctu egreditur, clam naviculam conscendit, obvoluto
capite, ne agnosceretur, et quamquam mare saeva tempestate intumescebat,
in altum tamen protinus dirigi navigium iubet et, gubernatore
trepidante, "Quid times?" inquit "Caesarem vehis!" neque prius
gubernatorem cedere adversae tempestati passus est, quam paene obrutus
esset fluctibus.

Deinde Caesar in Epirum profectus Pompeium Pharsalico proelio fudit, et
fugientem persecutus, ut occisum cognovit, Ptolemaeo regi, Pompeii
interfectori, a quo sibi quoque insidias tendi videret, bellum intulit;
quo victo in Pontum transiit Pharnacemque, Mithridatis filium,
rebellantem et multiplici successu praeferocem intra quintum ab adventu
diem, quattuor, quibus in conspectum venit, horis una profligavit acie,
more fulminis, quod uno eodemque momento venit, percussit, abscessit.
Nec vana de se praedicatio est Caesaris ante victum hostem esse quam
visum. Pontico postea triumpho trium verborum praetulit titulum: "Veni,
vidi, vici." Deinde Scipionem et Iubam, Numidiae regem, reliquias
Pompeianarum partium in Africa refoventes, devicit.

Victorem Africani belli Gaium Caesarem gravius excepit Hispaniense, quod
Cn. Pompeius, Magni filius, adulescens fortissimus, ingens ac terribile
conflaverat, undique ad eum auxiliis paterni nominis magnitudinem
sequentium ex toto orbe confluentibus. Sua Caesarem in Hispaniam
comitata fortuna est: sed nullum umquam atrocius periculosiusque ab eo
initum proelium, adeo ut, plus quam dubio Marte, descenderet equo
consistensque ante recedentem suorum aciem increpans fortunam, quod se
in eum servasset exitum, denuntiaret militibus vestigio se non
recessurum; proinde viderent, quem et quo loco imperatorem deserturi
essent. Verecundia magis quam virtute acies restituta est. Cn. Pompeius
victus et interemptus est. Caesar, omnium victor, regressus in urbem
omnibus, qui contra se arma tulerant, ignovit et quinquies triumphavit.

Bellis civilibus confectis, conversus iam ad ordinandum rei publicae
statum fastos correxit annumque ad cursum solis accommodavit, ut
trecentorum sexaginta quinque dierum esset et, intercalario mense
sublato, unus dies quarto quoque anno intercalaretur. Ius laboriosissime
ac severissime dixit. Repetundarum convictos etiam ordine senatorio
movit. Peregrinarum mercium portoria instituit: legem praecipue
sumptuariam exercuit. De ornanda instruendaque urbe, item de tuendo
ampliandoque imperio plura ac maiora in dies destinabat: imprimis ius
civile ad certum modum redigere atque ex immensa legum copia optima
quaeque et necessaria in paucissimos conferre libros; bibliothecas
Graecas et Latinas, quas maximas posset, publicare; siccare Pomptinas
paludes: viam munire a Mari Supero per Apennini dorsum ad Tiberim usque:
Dacos, qui se in Pontum effuderant, coercere: mox Parthis bellum inferre
per Armeniam.

Haec et alia agentem et meditantem mors praevenit. Dictator enim in
perpetuum creatus agere insolentius coepit: senatum ad se venientem
sedens excepit et quendam, ut adsurgeret monentem, irato vultu respexit.
Cum Antonius, Caesaris in omnibus bellis comes et tunc consulatus
conlega, capiti eius in sella aurea sedentis pro rostris diadema,
insigne regium, imposuisset, id ita ab eo est repulsum, ut non offensus
videretur. Quare coniuratum in eum est a sexaginta amplius viris, Cassio
et Bruto ducibus conspirationis, decretumque eum Idibus Martiis in
senatu confodere.

Plurima indicia futuri periculi obtulerant dii immortales. Uxor
Calpurnia, territa nocturno visu, ut Idibus Martiis domi subsisteret
orabat et Spurinna haruspex praedixerat ut proximos dies triginta quasi
fatales caveret, quorum ultimus erat Idus Martiae. Hoc igitur die Caesar
Spurinnae "Ecquid scis" inquit "Idus Martias iam venisse?" et is "Ecquid
scis illas nondum praeterisse?" Atque cum Caesar eo die in senatum
venisset, adsidentem conspirati specie officii circumsteterunt ilicoque
unus, quasi aliquid rogaturus, propius accessit renuentique ab utroque
umero togam apprehendit. Deinde clamantem "Ista quidem vis est!" Casca,
unus e coniuratis, adversum vulnerat paulum infra iugulum. Caesar Cascae
bracchium adreptum graphio traiecit conatusque prosilire alio vulnere
tardatus est. Dein ut animadvertit undique se strictis pugionibus peti,
toga caput obvolvit et ita tribus et viginti plagis confossus est. Cum
Marcum Brutum, quem filii loco habebat in se inruentem vidisset, dixisse
fertur: "Tu quoque, mi fili!"

Illud inter omnes fere constitit talem ei mortem paene ex sententia
obtigisse. Nam et quondam cum apud Xenophontem legisset Cyrum ultima
valetudine mandasse quaedam de funere suo, aspernatus tam lentum mortis
genus subitam sibi celeremque optaverat, et pridie quam occideretur, in
sermone nato super cenam quisnam esset finis vitae commodissimus,
repentinum inopinatumque praetulerat. Percussorum autem neque triennio
quisquam amplius supervixit neque sua morte defunctus est. Damnati omnes
alius alio casu perierunt, pars naufragio, pars proelio; nonnulli semet
eodem illo pugione, quo Caesarem violaverant, interemerunt.

Quo rarior in regibus et principibus viris moderatio, hoc laudanda magis
est. C. Iulius Caesar victoria civili clementissime usus est; cum enim
scrinia deprehendisset epistularum ad Pompeium missarum ab iis, qui
videbantur aut in diversis aut in neutris fuisse partibus, legere
noluit, sed combussit, ne forte in multos gravius consulendi locum
darent. Cicero hanc laudem eximiam Caesari tribuit, quod nihil oblivisci
soleret nisi iniurias. Simultates omnes, occasione oblata, libens
deposuit. Ultro ac prior scripsit C. Calvo post famosa eius adversum se
epigrammata. Valerium Catullum, cuius versiculis famam suam laceratam
non ignorabat, adhibuit cenae. C. Memmii suffragator in petitione
consulatus fuit, etsi asperrimas fuisse eius in se orationes sciebat.

Fuisse traditur excelsa statura, ore paulo pleniore, nigris vegetisque
oculis, capite calvo; quam calvitii deformitatem, quod saepe
obtrectatorum iocis obnoxia erat, aegre ferebat. Ideo ex omnibus
decretis sibi a senatu populoque honoribus non alium aut recepit aut
usurpavit libentius quam ius laureae perpetuo gestandae. Vini
parcissimum eum fuisse ne inimici quidem negaverunt. Verbum Catonis est
unum ex omnibus Caesarem ad evertendam rem publicam sobrium accessisse.
Armorum et equitandi peritissimus, laboris ultra fidem patiens; in
agmine nonnumquam equo, saepius pedibus anteibat, capite detecto, seu
sol, seu imber erat. Longissimas vias incredibili celeritate
conficiebat, ut persaepe nuntios de se praeveniret: neque eum morabantur
flumina, quae vel nando vel innixus inflatis utribus traiciebat.


  #XXVII. Gâius Iûlius Caesar# [[as printed]]

    [Illustration: CAESAR]

  C. Iûlius Caesar,[8] nôbilissimâ Iûliôrum genitus
  familiâ,[9] annum agêns sextum et decimum patrem
  âmîsit. Cornêliam, Cinnae[10] fîliam, dûxit uxôrem;
  cûius pater cum esset Sullae inimîcissimus, is[11]
  Caesarem voluit compellere ut eam repudiâret;                      {5}
  neque[12] id potuit efficere. Quâ rê Caesar bonîs
  spoliâtus cum etiam ad necem quaererêtur, mûtâtâ
  veste nocte urbe êlâpsus[13] est et quamquam tunc
    [[87]]
  quârtânae[1] morbô labôrâbat, prope[2] per singulâs noctês latebrâs
  commûtâre côgêbâtur; et comprehênsus â Sullae lîbêrtô, nê[3] ad   {10}
  Sullam perdûcerêtur, vix datâ[4] pecûniâ êvâsit. Postrêmô per
  propinquôs et adfînês suôs veniam impetrâvit. Satis cônstat
  Sullam, cum dêprecantibus[5] amîcissimîs et ôrnâtissimîs virîs
  aliquamdiû dênegâsset atque illî pertinâciter contenderent,
  expûgnâtum tandem prôclâmâsse, vincerent,[6] dummodo scîrent[7] eum,
  quem incolumem tantô opere cuperent, aliquandô optimâtium         {16}
  partibus, quâs sêcum simul dêfendissent, exitiô futûrum; nam
  Caesarî multôs Mariôs inesse.

  Stîpendia prîma in Asiâ fêcit. In expûgnâtiône Mitylênârum
  corônâ cîvicâ dônâtus est. Mortuô Sullâ, Rhodum sêcêdere          {20}
  statuit, ut per otium Apollôniô Molônî, tunc clârissimô dîcendî[8]
  magistrô, operam daret. Hûc dum trâicit, â praedônibus captus
  est mânsitque apud eôs prope quadrâgintâ diês. Per omne autem
  illud spatium ita sê gessit, ut pîrâtîs pariter terrôrî venerâtiônîque
  esset. Comitês interim servôsque ad expediendâs pecûniâs, quibus  {25}
  redimerêtur, dîmîsit. Vîgintî talenta pîrâtae pôstulâverant: ille
  quînquâgintâ datûrum sê spopondit. Quibus numerâtîs cum           {27}
  expositus esset in lîtore, cônfêstim Mîlêtum, quae urbs proximê[9]
  aberat, properâvit ibique contrâctâ classe invectus in eum locum,
  in quô ipsî praedônês erant, partem classis fugâvit, partem mersit,
  aliquot nâvês cêpit pîrâtâsque in potestâtem redâctôs eô suppliciô,
  quod illîs saepe minâtus inter iocum erat, adfêcit crucîque suffîxit.

    [[88]]
  Quaestôrî ûlterior[1] Hispânia obvênit. Quô profectus cum Alpês
  trânsîret et ad cônspectum pauperis cûiusdam vîcî comitês per     {35}
  iocum inter sê disputârent num illîc[2] etiam esset ambitiônî locus,
  sêriô dîxit Caesar mâlle sê ibi prîmum esse, quam Rômae secundum.
  Dominâtiônis avidus[3] â prîmâ aetâte rêgnum concupîscêbat
  semperque in ôre habêbat hôs Eurîpidis, Graecî poêtae, versûs:

    Nam sî violandum est iûs, rêgnandî grâtiâ                       {40}
    Violandum est. Aliîs[4] rêbus pietâtem colâs.[5]

  Cumque Gadês, quod est Hispâniae oppidum, vênisset, animadversâ
  apud Herculis templum mâgnî Alexandrî imâgine ingemuit
  et quasi pertaesus îgnâviam suam, quod nihildum â sê memorâbile
  âctum esset in eâ aetâte, quâ iam Alexander orbem terrârum        {45}
  subêgisset, missiônem continuô efflâgitâvit ad captandâs quam prîmum
  mâiôrum rêrum occâsiônes in urbe.

  Aedîlis praeter comitium ac Forum etiam Capitôlium ôrnâvit
  porticibus. Vênâtiônes autem lûdôsque[6] et cum conlêgâ M. Bibulô
  et sêparâtim êdidit: quô[7] factum est ut commûnium quoque        {50}
  impênsârum sôlus grâtiam caperet. Hîs autem rêbus patrimônium
  effûdit tantumque cônflâvit aes aliênum, ut ipse dîceret sibi[8] opus
  esse mîlliês sêstertium, ut habêret nihil.

  [Sidenote: B.C. 60.]

  Cônsul deinde creâtus cum M. Bibulô, societâtem[9] cum Gnaeô
  Pompêiô et Marcô Crassô iûnxit Caesar, nê quid agerêtur in        {55}
  rê pûblicâ, quod displicuisset ûllî ex tribus. Deinde lêgem
    [[89]]
  tulit ut ager Campânus plêbî dîvîderêtur. Cuî lêgî cum senâtus
  repûgnâret, rem ad populum dêtulit. Bibulus conlêga in Forum
  vênit, ut lêgî obsisteret, sed tanta in eum commôta est sêditiô, ut
  in caput êius cophinus stercore plênus effunderêtur fascêsque eî  {60}
  frangerentur atque adeô ipse armîs Forô expellerêtur. Quâ rê
  cum Bibulus per reliquum annî tempus domô abditus Cûriâ abstinêret,
  ûnus ex eô tempore Caesar omnia in rê pûblicâ ad arbitrium
  administrâbat, ut nônnûllî urbânôrum, sî[1] quid têstandî grâtiâ
  sîgnârent, per iocum nôn, ut môs erat, 'cônsulibus[2] Caesare et  {65}
  Bibulô' âctum[3] scrîberent, sed 'Iûliô et Caesare,' ûnum cônsulem
  nômine et côgnômine prô duôbus appellantês.

  Fûnctus[4] cônsulâtû Caesar Galliam prôvinciam accêpit. Gessit
  autem novem[5] annîs, quibus[5] in imperiô fuit, haec ferê: Galliam
  in prôvinciae fôrmam redêgit; Germânôs, quî trâns Rhênum          {70}
  incolunt, prîmus Rômânôrum ponte fabricâtô aggressus mâximîs
  adfêcit clâdibus. Aggressus est Britannôs, îgnôtôs anteâ,
  superâtîsque[6] pecûniâs et obsidês imperâvit. Hîc[7] cum[8] multa
  Rômânôrum mîlitum însîgnia nârrantur, tum[8] illud[9] êgregium ipsîus
  Caesaris, quod, nûtante in fugam exercitû, raptô fugientis ê manû
  scûtô in prîmam volitâns aciem proelium restituit. Îdem aliô      {76}
  proeliô legiônis aquiliferum ineundae fugae causâ iam[10] conversum
  faucibus comprehênsum[11] in contrâriam partem dêtrâxit dextramque
    [[90]]
  ad hostem tendêns "Quôrsum tû" inquit "abîs? Illîc sunt,
  cum quibus dîmicâmus." Quâ adhortâtiône omnium legiônum           {80}
  trepidâtiônem corrêxit vincîque parâtâs vincere docuit.

  [Sidenote: B.C. 53.]

  [Sidenote: B.C. 49.]

  Interfectô intereâ apud Parthôs Crassô et dêfûnctâ Iûliâ,
  Caesaris fîliâ, quae, nûpta Pompêiô, generî socerîque concordiam
  tenêbat,[1] statim aemulâtiô êrûpit. Iam prîdem Pompêiô
  sûspectae[2] Caesaris opês et Caesarî Pompêiâna dîgnitâs gravis,  {85}
  nec hîc[3] ferêbat parem, nec ille[3] superiôrem. Itaque cum
  Caesar in Galliâ dêtinêrêtur, et, nê imperfectô bellô discêderet,
  pôstulâsset ut sibi licêret, quamvîs absentî,[4] alterum cônsulâtum
  petere, â senâtû, suâdentibus Pompêiô êiusque amîcîs, negâtum eî
  est. Hanc iniûriam acceptam vindicâtûrus[5] in Îtaliam rediit et  {90}
  bellandum[6] ratus cum exercitû Rubicônem flûmen, quî[7]
  prôvinciae êius fînis erat, trânsiit. Hôc ad flûmen paulum
  cônstitisse fertur ac reputâns quantum môlîrêtur, conversus ad
  proximôs, "Etiamnunc" inquit "regredî possumus; quod sî ponticulum
  trânsierimus, omnia armîs agenda erunt." Postrêmô autem           {95}
  "Iacta âlea estô!" exclâmâns exercitum trâicî iussit plûrimîsque
  urbibus occupâtîs Brundisium contendit, quô Pompêius cônsulêsque
  cônfûgerant.

  Quî cum inde in Êpîrum trâiêcissent, Caesar, eôs secûtus â        {99}
  Brundisiô, Dyrrachium inter[8] oppositâs classês gravissimâ hieme
  trânsmîsit; côpiîsque[9] quâs subsequî iusserat diûtius cessantibus,
  cum ad eâs arcessendâs frûstrâ mîsisset, mîrae audâciae facinus
    [[91]]
  êdidit. Morae enim impatiêns castrîs noctû êgreditur, clam
  nâviculam cônscendit, obvolûtô capite, nê âgnôscerêtur, et quamquam
  mare saevâ tempestâte intumêscêbat, in altum tamen prôtinus      {105}
  dîrigî nâvigium iubet et, gubernâtôre trepidante, "Quid timês?"
  inquit "Caesarem vehis!" neque prius[1] gubernâtôrem cêdere
  adversae tempestâtî passus est, quam[1] paene obrutus esset[1]
  fluctibus.

  [Sidenote: B.C. 48.]

  Deinde Caesar in Êpîrum profectus Pompêium Pharsâlicô            {110}
  proeliô fûdit, et fugientem persecûtus, ut occîsum côgnôvit,
  Ptolemaeô rêgî, Pompêiî interfectôrî, â quô sibi quoque
  însidiâs tendî vidêret, bellum intulit; quô victô in Pontum
  trânsiit Pharnacemque, Mithridâtis fîlium, rebellantem et        {114}
  multiplicî successû[2] praeferôcem intrâ[3] quîntum ab adventû diem,
  quattuor, quibus[4] in cônspectum vênit, hôrîs[4] ûnâ prôflîgâvit
  aciê, môre fulminis, quod ûnô eôdemque mômentô vênit, percussit,
  abscessit. Nec vâna dê sê praedicâtiô est Caesaris ante
  victum hostem esse quam vîsum.[5] Ponticô[6] posteâ triumphô
  trium verbôrum praetulit titulum: "Vênî, vîdî, vîcî." Deinde     {120}
  Scîpiônem[7] et Iubam, Numidiae rêgem, reliquiâs Pompêiânârum
  partium in Âfricâ refoventês, dêvîcit.[8]

  Victôrem Âfricânî bellî Gâium Caesarem gravius excêpit Hispâniênse,
  quod Cn. Pompêius, Mâgnî[9] fîlius, adulêscêns fortissimus,
  ingêns ac terribile cônflâverat, undique ad eum auxiliîs[10]     {125}
  paternî nôminis mâgnitûdinem sequentium[11] ex tôtô orbe
      cônfluentibus.
    [[92]]
  Sua[1] Caesarem in Hispâniam comitâta fortûna est: sed
  nûllum umquam atrôcius perîculôsiusque ab eô initum proelium,
  adeô ut, plûs[2] quam dubiô Mârte, dêscenderet equô cônsistênsque
  ante recêdentem suôrum aciem increpâns fortûnam, quod sê in      {130}
  eum servâsset exitum, dênûntiâret mîlitibus vêstîgiô sê nôn
  recessûrum; proinde vidêrent,[3] quem[4] et quô locô imperâtôrem
  dêsertûrî essent. Verêcundiâ magis quam virtûte aciês restitûta est.
  Cn. Pompêius victus et interêmptus est. Caesar, omnium victor,
  regressus in urbem omnibus, quî contrâ sê arma tulerant, îgnôvit
  et quînquiês triumphâvit.                                        {136}

  Bellîs cîvîlibus cônfectîs, conversus iam ad ôrdinandum reî
  pûblicae statum fâstôs[5] corrêxit annumque ad cursum sôlis
  accommodâvit, ut trecentôrum sexâgintâ quînque diêrum esset
  et, intercalâriô[5] mênse sublâtô, ûnus diês quârtô quôque[6] annô
  intercalârêtur. Iûs labôriôsissimê ac sevêrissimê dîxit.         {141}
  Repetundârum[7] convictôs etiam ôrdine senâtôriô môvit. Peregrînârum
  mercium portôria înstituit: lêgem[8] praecipuê sûmptuâriam exercuit.
  Dê ôrnandâ înstruendâque urbe, item dê tuendô ampliandôque
  imperiô plûra ac mâiôra in diês dêstinâbat: imprîmîs iûs         {145}
  cîvîle ad certum modum redigere[9] atque ex immênsâ lêgum côpiâ
    [[93]]
  optima quaeque et necessâria in paucissimôs cônferre librôs;
  bibliothêcâs Graecâs et Latînâs, quâs[1] mâximâs posset, pûblicâre;
  siccâre Pomptînâs palûdês: viam munîre â Marî Superô per Apennînî
  dorsum ad Tiberim ûsque: Dâcôs, quî sê in Pontum effûderant,     {150}
  coercêre: mox Parthîs bellum înferre per Armeniam.

  Haec et alia agentem et meditantem mors praevênit. Dictâtor
  enim in perpetuum creâtus agere însolentius coepit: senâtum ad
  sê venientem sedêns excêpit et quendam, ut adsurgeret monentem,  {154}
  îrâtô vultû respexit. Cum Antônius,[2] Caesaris in omnibus bellîs
  comes et tunc cônsulâtûs conlêga, capitî êius in sellâ aureâ sedentis
  prô rôstrîs diadêma, însîgne rêgium, imposuisset, id ita ab eô
  est repulsum, ut nôn offênsus vidêrêtur. Quârê coniûrâtum in
  eum est â[3] sexâgintâ amplius virîs, Cassiô et Brûtô ducibus    {159}
  cônspîrâtiônis, dêcrêtumque eum Îdibus Mârtiîs in senâtû cônfodere.

  [Sidenote: March 15, B.C. 44.]

  Plûrima indicia futûrî perîculî obtulerant diî immortâlês. Uxor
  Calpurnia, territa nocturnô vîsû, ut Îdibus Mârtiîs domî subsisteret
  ôrâbat et Spûrinna harûspex praedîxerat[4] ut proximôs diês
  trîgintâ quasi fâtâlês cavêret, quôrum ultimus erat Îdûs Mârtiae.
  Hôc igitur diê Caesar Spûrinnae "Ecquid scîs" inquit "Îdûs       {165}
  Mârtiâs iam vênisse?" et is "Ecquid scîs illâs nôndum praeterîsse?"
  Atque cum Caesar eô diê in senâtum vênisset, adsîdentem
  cônspîrâtî speciê[5] officiî circumstetêrunt îlicôque ûnus, quasi
  aliquid rogâtûrus, propius accessit renuentîque[6] ab[7] utrôque
  umerô togam apprehendit. Deinde clâmantem "Ista quidem           {170}
  vîs est!" Casca, ûnus ê coniûrâtîs, adversum[8] vulnerat paulum
    [[94]]
  înfrâ iugulum. Caesar Cascae bracchium adreptum graphiô trâiêcit
  cônâtusque prôsilîre aliô vulnere tardâtus est. Dein ut
  animadvertit undique sê strictîs pugiônibus petî,[1] togâ caput
  obvolvit et ita tribus et vîgintî plâgîs cônfossus est. Cum      {175}
  Mârcum Brûtum, quem fîliî locô habêbat in sê inruentem vîdisset,
  dîxisse fertur: "Tû quoque, mî fîlî!"

    [Illustration: THE DEATH OF CAESAR]

  Illud inter omnês ferê cônstitit tâlem eî mortem paene ex
  sententiâ obtigisse.[2] Nam et quondam cum apud Xenophôntem
  lêgisset Cyrum ultimâ valêtûdine mandâsse quaedam dê fûnere      {180}
  suô, âspernâtus tam lentum mortis genus subitam sibi celeremque
    [[95]]
  optâverat, et prîdiê quam occîderêtur, in sermône nâtô super
  cênam quisnam esset fînis vîtae commodissimus, repentînum
  inopînâtumque praetulerat. Percussôrum autem neque trienniô
  quisquam amplius supervîxit neque suâ[1] morte dêfûnctus est.    {185}
  Damnâtî omnês alius aliô câsû periêrunt, pars naufragiô, pars
  proeliô; nônnûllî sêmet eôdem illô pugiône, quô Caesarem violâverant,
  interêmêrunt.

  Quô[2] rârior in rêgibus et prîncipibus virîs moderâtiô, hôc
  laudanda magis est. C. Iûlius Caesar victôriâ cîvîlî[3]          {190}
  clêmentissimê ûsus est; cum enim scrînia dêprehendisset epistulârum
  ad Pompêium missârum ab iîs, quî[4] vidêbantur aut in dîversîs
  aut in neutrîs fuisse partibus, legere nôluit, sed combûssit, nê[5]
  forte in multôs gravius cônsulendî locum darent. Cicerô hanc     {194}
  laudem eximiam Caesarî tribuit, quod nihil oblivîscî solêret nisi
  iniûriâs. Simultâtês omnês, occâsiône oblâtâ, libêns dêposuit.
  Ultrô ac prior scrîpsit C. Calvô post fâmôsa êius adversum sê
  epigrammata. Valerium Catullum, cûius[6] versiculîs fâmam suam
  lacerâtam nôn îgnôrâbat, adhibuit cênae. C. Memmiî suffrâgâtor
  in petîtiône cônsulâtûs fuit, etsî asperrimâs fuisse êius in sê  {200}
  ôrâtiônês sciêbat.

  Fuisse trâditur excelsâ statûrâ,[7] ôre[7] paulô[8] plêniôre, nigrîs
  vegetîsque oculîs,[7] capite[7] calvô; quam calvitiî dêfôrmitâtem,
  quod saepe obtrêctâtôrum iocîs obnoxia erat, aegrê ferêbat. Ideô
  ex omnibus dêcrêtîs sibi â senâtû populôque honôribus nôn alium  {205}
  aut recêpit aut ûsûrpâvit libentius quam iûs laureae[9] perpetuô
    [[96]]
  gestandae. Vînî[1] parcissimum eum fuisse nê inimîcî quidem
  negâvêrunt. Verbum Catônis est ûnum ex omnibus Caesarem
  ad êvertendam rem pûblicam sôbrium accessisse. Armôrum et
  equitandî perîtissimus, labôris ultrâ fidem patiêns; in âgmine   {210}
  nônnumquam equô, saepius pedibus anteîbat, capite dêtêctô, seu
  sôl, seu imber erat. Longissimâs viâs incrêdibilî celeritâte
  cônficiêbat, ut[2] persaepe nûntiôs dê sê praevenîret: neque eum
  morâbantur flûmina, quae vel nandô vel innîxus înflâtîs utribus
  trâiciêbat.                                                      {215}

    [Footnotes: XXVII (pages 86-96)

    86.8: See Vocab., _Iûlius_.
    86.9: ablative of source.
    86.10: Cf. p. 73, n. 1.
    86.11: i.e. Sulla.
    86.12: #neque potuit#: '_but_ he was not able.'
    86.13: _êlâbor_.
    87.1: #quârtânae# (sc. _febris_) #. . . labôrâbat#: 'he was
    suffering from intermittent fever.' #morbô# is abl. of cause.
    87.2: #prope . . . noctês#: 'almost every night.'
    87.3: #nê . . . êvâsit#: 'he barely, by giving money, escaped
    being surrendered to Sulla.' #nê . . . perdûcerêtur# expresses the
    purpose of #datâ pecûniâ#.
    87.4: Cf. p. xxiii, K 8.
    87.5: = a rel. clause (cf. p. xxiv, L 1): 'who pleaded (for
    Caesar)'; lit., 'who sought to beg him off.'
    87.6: For the subjunctive, see p. 63, n. 5. Sulla said: _Vincite,
    dummodo sciâtis_, etc. Translate #prôclâmâsse . . . scîrent# thus:
    'cried out (bidding them) have their way, but at the same time to
    (lit. provided they) realize.'
    87.7: See H 587 (513, I): M 920: A 314: G 573: B 310.
    87.8: 'oratory.'
    87.9: _prope abesse_ = 'to be near by,' is a common idiom.
    88.1: See Vocab., _Hispânia_.
    88.2: i.e. even in so insignificant a place.
    88.3: = _quod avidus erat_.
    88.4: #aliîs rêbus#: 'under other circumstances,' 'otherwise.' For
    the case, see p. 27, n. 3.
    88.5: The subjunctive here = an imperative: see p. 31, n. 9. Note
    also that #colâs# is an example of the indefinite or universal
    second person, since the command is addressed, not to any
    particular individual, but to any one and every one.
    88.6: #lûdôs êdidit#: 'he celebrated games.' On the magnificence
    of the games which the Aediles gave depended very largely their
    chance of promotion to the higher offices.
    88.7: 'whereby'; abl. of means.
    88.8: #sibi . . . sêstertium#: with #mîlliês# sc. _centêna mîlia_,
    and take #sêstertium# as gen. plural from _sêstertius_, and
    dependent on _mîlia_. Translate: 'that he needed 100,000,000
    sesterces,' i.e. about $4,000,000. See Vocab., _sêstertius_.
    88.9: #societâtem . . . iûnxit#: this combination is called 'The
    First Triumvirate.'
    89.1: #sî . . . sîgnârent#: an instance of the iterative
    subjunctive (p. 45, n. 2) = 'whenever they affixed their seals as
    witnesses.'
    89.2: #cônsulibus . . . Bibulô#: for this way of dating events,
    see XIV, 1.
    89.3: Sc. _esse_.
    89.4: #fûnctus# (_fungor_) = _postquam fûnctus est_.
    89.5: Cf. p. xvii, C 2.
    89.6: Sc. _eîs_, as dat. of indirect object with #imperâvit#.
    Caesar's operations were confined to the southern portion of Great
    Britain.
    89.7: = _Hôc tempore_, i.e. during this campaign. The language of
    this whole sentence is somewhat loose. The writer begins as if he
    were going to say: _Hîc, cum . . . nârrantur, tum Caesarem ipsum
    êgregium fêcisse nârrant_, but changes the construction at #tum#.
    89.8: #cum . . . tum#: cf. p. 67, n. 7.
    89.9: #illud# is explained by the clause #quod . . . restituit#.
    The episode occurred in one of Caesar's Gallic campaigns, not, as
    here stated, in Britain. It is related in the second book of
    Caesar's _Gallic War_. Cf. also Longfellow's _Courtship of Miles
    Standish_, II.
    89.10: #iam conversum# = _quî iam conversus erat_.
    89.11: #comprehênsum . . . dêtrâxit# = _comprehendit et . . .
    dêtrâxit_.
    90.1: 'preserved.'
    90.2: Sc. _erant_; also _erat_ with #gravis#. Through the
    influence of #iam prîdem# both verbs have the force of Eng.
    pluperfects: H 535, 1 (469, 2): M 738: A 277, _b_: G 234:
    B 260, 4.
    90.3: Point out the chiasmus (p. 21, n. 15) in #Caesaris . . .
    superiôrem#.
    90.4: The law required a candidate to give notice of his candidacy
    in person at Rome within seventeen days of the election. Caesar
    desired to stand for the consulship in 49 B.C.
    90.5: Cf. p. xviii, E 5.
    90.6: #bellandum# (sc. _esse_): an impersonal passive: 'that war
    was necessary.'
    90.7: #quî . . . erat#: this river also formed the boundary
    between Italy proper and Cisalpine Gaul; hence by crossing it
    Caesar put himself in a position of open hostility to the
    government.
    90.8: = _per_, 'through the midst of.'
    90.9: #côpiîs . . . cêssantibus#: causal abl. abs.: 'when, because
    his forces . . . tarried too long, he had sent,' etc.
    91.1: Cf. p. xx, G 4.
    91.2: abl. both of cause and means. Join with #praeferôcem#.
    91.3: #intrâ . . . vênit#: 'within four days of his arrival (and)
    within four hours after he caught sight of him.'
    91.4: See p. xvii, C 2.
    91.5: Strictly, we ought to have _ante victum esse quam vîsus
    esset_, the subjunctive being due to the indirect discourse.
    Caesar said: _ante victus est quam vîsus_ (_est_). The infinitive
    #vîsum# (_esse_) is due to attraction of the neighboring
    infinitive #victum esse#.
    91.6: #Ponticô . . . triumphô#: i.e. the procession in which he
    celebrated his victory in Pontus. #triumphô# is dat. with
    #praetulit#.
    91.7: Q. Metellus Pius Scipio, father-in-law of Pompey.
    91.8: at Thapsus, 46 B.C.
    91.9: Cf. XXVI, 49.
    91.10: #auxiliîs . . . cônfluentibus#: the abl. abs. denotes both
    cause and attendant circumstance.
    91.11: = _eôrum quî sequêbantur_. Cf. _volentibus_, XIII, 97.
    92.1: 'His own,' i.e. his usual.
    92.2: #plûs . . . Mârte#: 'since the battle was more than
    doubtful.' The battle was fought at Munda, 45 B.C.
    92.3: Cf. p. 63, n. 5.
    92.4: = _quâlem_. So #quô# = _quâlî_.
    92.5: #fâstôs corrêxit#: In III, 22, it is stated that Numa
    divided the year into twelve months according to the course of the
    moon. This year contained only 355 days. In order, therefore, to
    make the months coincide with the seasons to which they belong,
    Numa ordered that every two years an extra month, called a _mênsis
    intercalâris_, should be added. These intercalary months were
    inserted after February 23d, and contained alternately 22 and 23
    days. This arrangement made the average length of the year 366-1/4
    days. A further cause of confusion was the fact that the
    Pontifices, who had charge of the calendar, often, for political
    reasons, omitted the intercalary month. In Caesar's time the error
    amounted to about three months. The calendar arranged by him is
    almost identical with that in use to-day.
    92.6: from _quisque_: 'each,' 'every.'
    92.7: Sc. _rêrum_. _rês repetundae_ was a technical term for
    'extortion.' For the gen., see p. 36, n. 8.
    92.8: A _lêx sumptuâria_ was a law regulating the sums of money
    which might be spent for various purposes. Caesar attempted
    especially to check extravagance in dress and at banquets.
    92.9: The infinitives in lines 146-151 are used because the
    clauses in which they stand are in apposition to _plûra ac
    mâiôra_, l. 144. See p. 86, n. 5.
    93.1: #quâs . . . pûblicâre#: 'to throw open to the public as
    large libraries as possible.'
    93.2: The celebrated Mark Antony.
    93.3: #â . . . virîs#: 'by more than sixty men.' For the case of
    #virîs#, see p. 10, n. 18.
    93.4: 'had warned him,' _not_ 'had predicted': hence it may be
    construed with a substantive clause of purpose (#ut . . .
    cavêret#) as its object.
    93.5: #speciê officiî#: 'under pretense of doing him honor.' Cf.
    _per speciem vênandî_, XIX, 60.
    93.6: Sc. _eî_: dat. of interest.
    93.7: 'by'; cf. p. 11, n. 10.
    93.8: #adversum# (sc. _eum_) #vulnerat#: 'wounds him in front.'
    The wound was in the shoulder. For #adversum# as = an adverbial
    phrase, cf. p. 4, n. 4.
    94.1: 'assailed.'
    94.2: _obtingô_.
    95.1: #suâ morte#: 'a natural death'; an ablative of manner.
    95.2: #Quô rârior . . . hôc laudanda magis#: 'The rarer . . . the
    more praiseworthy.' #Quô# and #hôc# are ablative of the degree of
    difference (a variety of the ablative of means): cf. p. 39, n. 12.
    95.3: i.e. over his fellow-citizens.
    95.4: #quî . . . partibus#: 'who had apparently belonged,' etc.
    How literally? With #dîversîs# sc. _Pompêiô_.
    95.5: #nê . . . darent#: 'that they might not by any chance give
    occasion to vigorous measures,' etc.
    95.6: #cûius . . . îgnôrâbat#: 'by whose verses, as he very well
    knew, his own fair fame had been wounded.'
    95.7: ablatives of characteristic.
    95.8: #paulô plêniôre#: 'somewhat full.'
    95.9: Sc. _corônae_, and cf. the frequent omission of _manus_ with
    _dextra_ and _sinistra_.
    96.1: #Vînî parcissimum#: cf. _Cibî vînîque temperâns, somnî
    parcus_, XXVI, 21, and note.
    96.2: #ut . . . praevenîret# expresses result, not purpose.]


#XXVIII. Marcus Tullius Cicero# [[stripped text]]

Marcus Tullius Cicero, equestri genere, Arpini, quod est Volscorum
oppidum, natus est. Ex eius avis unus verrucam in extremo naso sitam
habuit, ciceris grano similem; inde cognomen Ciceronis genti inditum.
Suadentibus quibusdam ut id nomen mutaret, "Dabo operam" inquit "ut
istud cognomen nobilissimorum nominum splendorem vincat." Cum a patre
Romam missus, ubi celeberrimorum magistrorum scholis interesset, eas
artes disceret, quibus aetas puerilis ad humanitatem solet informari,
tanto successu tantaque cum praeceptorum tum ceterorum discipulorum
admiratione id fecit, ut, cum fama de Ciceronis ingenio et doctrina ad
alios manasset, non pauci, qui eius videndi et audiendi gratia scholas
adirent, reperti esse dicantur.

Cum nulla re magis ad summos in re publica honores viam muniri posse
intellegeret quam arte dicendi et eloquentia, toto animo in eius studium
incubuit, in quo quidem ita versatus est, ut non solum eos, qui in Foro
et iudiciis causas perorarent, studiose sectaretur, sed privatim quoque
diligentissime se exerceret. Primum eloquentiam et libertatem adversus
Sullanos ostendit. Nam cum Roscium quendam, parricidii accusatum, ob
Chrysogoni, Sullae liberti, qui in eius adversariis erat, potentiam nemo
defendere auderet, tanta eloquentiae vi eum defendit Cicero, ut iam tum
in arte dicendi nullus ei par esse videretur. Ex quo invidiam veritus
Athenas studiorum gratia petiit, ubi Antiochum philosophum studiose
audivit. Inde eloquentiae causa Rhodum se contulit, ubi Molonem, Graecum
rhetorem tum disertissimum, magistrum habuit. Qui cum Ciceronem dicentem
audivisset, flevisse dicitur, quod per hunc Graecia eloquentiae laude
privaretur.

Romam reversus quaestor Siciliam habuit. Nullius vero quaestura aut
gratior aut clarior fuit; cum magna tum esset annonae difficultas,
initio molestus erat Siculis, quos cogeret frumenta in urbem mittere;
postea vero, diligentiam et iustitiam et comitatem eius experti, maiores
quaestori suo honores quam ulli umquam praetori detulerunt. E Sicilia
reversus Romam in causis dicendis ita floruit, ut inter omnes causarum
patronos et esset et haberetur princeps.

Consul deinde factus L. Sergii Catilinae coniurationem singulari
virtute, constantia, cura compressit. Catilinae proavum, M. Sergium,
incredibili fortitudine fuisse Plinius refert. Stipendia is fecit
secundo bello Punico. Secundo stipendio dextram manum perdidit:
stipendiis duobus ter et vicies vulneratus est: ob id neutra manu,
neutro pede satis utilis, plurimisque postea stipendiis debilis miles
erat. Bis ab Hannibale captus, bis vinculorum eius profugus, viginti
mensibus nullo non die in catenis aut compedibus custoditus. Sinistra
manu sola quater pugnavit, duobus equis, insidente eo, suffossis.
Dextram sibi ferream fecit eaque religata proeliatus Cremonam obsidione
exemit, Placentiam tutatus est, duodena castra hostium in Gallia cepit.
Ceteri profecto, Plinius addit, victores hominum fuere, Sergius vicit
etiam fortunam.

Singularem huius viri gloriam foede dehonestavit pronepotis scelus. Hic
enim rei familiaris, quam profuderat, inopia multorumque scelerum
conscientia in furorem actus et dominandi cupiditate incensus
indignatusque, quod in petitione consulatus repulsam passus esset,
coniuratione facta senatum confodere, consules trucidare, urbem
incendere, diripere aerarium constituerat. Actum erat de pulcherrimo
imperio, nisi illa coniuratio in Ciceronem et Antonium consules
incidisset, quorum alter industria rem patefecit, alter manu oppressit.
Cum Cicero, habito senatu, in praesentem reum perorasset, Catilina,
incendium suum ruina se restincturum esse minitans, Roma profugit et ad
exercitum, quem paraverat, proficiscitur, signa inlaturus urbi. Sed
socii eius, qui in urbe remanserant, comprehensi in carcere necati sunt.
A. Fulvius, vir senatorii ordinis, filium, iuvenem et ingenio et forma
inter aequales nitentem, pravo consilio Catilinae amicitiam secutum
inque castra eius ruentem, ex medio itinere retractum supplicio mortis
adfecit, praefatus non se Catilinae illum adversus patriam, sed patriae
adversus Catilinam genuisse.

Neque eo magis ab incepto Catilina destitit, sed infestis signis Romam
petens Antonii exercitu opprimitur. Quam atrociter dimicatum sit exitus
docuit: nemo hostium bello superfuit; quem quisque in pugnando ceperat
locum, eum amissa anima tegebat. Catilina longe a suis inter hostium
cadavera repertus est: pulcherrima morte, si pro patria sic concidisset!
Senatus populusque Romanus Ciceronem patrem patriae appellavit. Cicero
ipse in oratione pro Sulla palam praedicat consilium patriae servandae
fuisse iniectum sibi a diis, cum Catilina coniurasset adversus eam.
"O dii immortales," inquit "vos profecto incendistis tum animum meum
cupiditate conservandae patriae. Vos avocastis me a cogitationibus
omnibus ceteris et convertistis ad salutem unam patriae. Vos denique
praetulistis menti meae clarissimum lumen in tenebris tantis erroris et
inscientiae. Tribuam enim vobis, quae sunt vestra. Nec vero possum
tantum dare ingenio meo, ut dispexerim sponte mea in tempestate illa
turbulentissima rei publicae, quid esset optimum factu."

Paucis post annis Ciceroni diem dixit Clodius tribunus plebis, quod
cives Romanos indicta causa necavisset. Senatus maestus, tamquam in
publico luctu, veste mutata pro eo deprecabatur. Cicero, cum posset
armis salutem suam defendere, maluit urbe cedere quam sua causa caedem
fieri. Proficiscentem omnes boni flentes prosecuti sunt. Dein Clodius
edictum proposuit ut Marco Tullio igni et aqua interdiceretur: illius
domum et villas incendit. Sed vis illa non diuturna fuit, mox enim totus
fere populus Romanus ingenti desiderio Ciceronis reditum flagitare
coepit et maximo omnium ordinum studio Cicero in patriam revocatus est.
Nihil per totam vitam Ciceroni itinere, quo in patriam rediit, accidit
iucundius. Obviam ei redeunti ab universis itum est: domus eius publica
pecunia restituta est.

Gravissimae illa tempestate inter Caesarem et Pompeium ortae sunt
inimicitiae, ut res nisi bello dirimi non posse videretur. Cicero quidem
summo studio enitebatur ut eos inter se reconciliaret et a belli civilis
calamitatibus deterreret, sed cum neutrum ad pacem ineundam permovere
posset, Pompeium secutus est. Sed victo Pompeio, a Caesare victore
veniam ultro accepit. Quo interfecto Octavianum, Caesaris heredem,
fovit, Antonium impugnavit effecitque ut a senatu hostis iudicaretur.

Sed Antonius, inita cum Octaviano societate, Ciceronem iam diu sibi
inimicum proscripsit. Qua re audita, Cicero transversis itineribus in
villam, quae a mari proxime aberat, fugit indeque navem conscendit, in
Macedoniam transiturus. Unde aliquotiens in altum provectum cum modo
venti adversi rettulissent, modo ipse iactationem maris pati non posset,
taedium tandem eum et fugae et vitae cepit regressusque ad villam
"Moriar" inquit "in patria saepe servata." Satis constat, adventantibus
percussoribus, servos fortiter fideliterque paratos fuisse ad
dimicandum, ipsum deponi lecticam et quietos pati, quod sors iniqua
cogeret, iussisse. Prominenti ex lectica et immotam cervicem praebenti
caput praecisum est. Manus quoque abscissae; caput relatum est ad
Antonium eiusque iussu cum dextra manu in rostris positum.

Quamdiu res publica Romana per eos gerebatur, quibus se ipsa commiserat,
in eam curas cogitationesque fere omnes suas conferebat Cicero et plus
operae ponebat in agendo quam in scribendo. Cum autem dominatu unius
C. Iulii Caesaris omnia tenerentur, non se angoribus dedidit nec
indignis homine docto voluptatibus. Fugiens conspectum Fori urbisque
rura peragrabat abdebatque se, quantum licebat, et solus erat. Nihil
agere autem cum animus non posset, existimavit honestissime molestias
posse deponi, si se ad philosophiam rettulisset, cui adulescens multum
temporis tribuerat, et omne studium curamque convertit ad scribendum:
atque ut civibus etiam otiosus aliquid prodesse posset, elaboravit ut
doctiores fierent et sapientiores, pluraque brevi tempore, eversa re
publica, scripsit, quam multis annis ea stante scripserat. Sic facundiae
et Latinarum litterarum parens evasit paruitque virorum sapientium
praecepto, qui docent non solum ex malis eligere minima oportere, sed
etiam excerpere ex his ipsis, si quid insit boni.

Multa exstant facete ab eo dicta. Cum Lentulum, generum suum, exiguae
staturae hominem, vidisset longo gladio accinctum, "Quis" inquit
"generum meum ad gladium adligavit?"--Matrona quaedam iuniorem se, quam
erat, simulans dictitabat se triginta tantum annos habere; cui Cicero
"Verum est," inquit "nam hoc viginti annos audio."--Caesar, altero
consule mortuo die Decembris ultima, Caninium consulem hora septima in
reliquam diei partem renuntiaverat; quem cum plerique irent salutatum de
more, "Festinemus" inquit Cicero "priusquam abeat magistratu." De eodem
Caninio scripsit Cicero: "Fuit mirifica vigilantia Caninius, qui toto
suo consulatu somnum non viderit."


  #XXVIII. Mârcus Tullius Cicerô# [[as printed]]

    [Illustration: CICERÔ]

  Mârcus Tullius Cicerô, equestrî genere, Arpînî,
  quod est Volscôrum oppidum, nâtus est. Ex êius
  avîs[3] ûnus verrûcam[4] in extrêmô nâsô[5] sitam
  habuit, ciceris[6] grânô similem; inde côgnômen
  Cicerônis gentî inditum. Suâdentibus quibusdam                     {5}
  ut id nômen mûtâret, "Dabô operam"
  inquit "ut istud côgnômen nôbilissimôrum
  nôminum splendôrem vincat." Cum â patre
  Rômam missus, ubi[7] celeberrimôrum magistrôrum
  scholîs interesset, eâs artês dîsceret, quibus aetâs puerîlis ad  {10}
  hûmânitâtem[8] solet înfôrmârî, tantô successû tantâque cum
  praeceptôrum tum cêterôrum dîscipulôrum admîrâtiône id fêcit, ut,
  cum fâma dê Cicerônis ingeniô et doctrînâ ad aliôs mânâsset,[9]
  nôn paucî, quî êius videndî et audiendî grâtiâ scholâs adîrent,
  repertî esse dîcantur.                                            {15}

  Cum nûllâ rê magis ad summôs in rê pûblicâ honôrês viam
  mûnîrî posse intellegeret quam arte dîcendî et êloquentiâ, tôtô
    [[97]]
  animô in êius studium incubuit,[1] in quô quidem ita versâtus[2] est,
  ut nôn sôlum eôs, quî in Forô et iûdiciîs[3] causâs perôrârent,[4]
  studiôsê sectârêtur,[5] sed prîvâtim quoque dîligentissimê sê     {20}
  exercêret. Prîmum êloquentiam et lîbertâtem[6] adversus Sullânôs
  ostendit. Nam cum Rôscium quendam, parricîdiî accûsâtum, ob
  Chrysogonî, Sullae lîbêrtî,[7] quî in êius adversâriîs erat, potentiam
  nêmô dêfendere audêret, tantâ êloquentiae vî eum dêfendit Cicerô,
  ut iam tum in arte dîcendî nûllus eî pâr esse vidêrêtur. Ex quô   {25}
  invidiam veritus[8] Athênâs studiôrum grâtiâ petiit, ubi Antiochum
  philosophum studiôsê audîvit. Inde êloquentiae causâ Rhodum
  sê contulit, ubi Molônem, Graecum rhêtorem tum disertissimum,[9]
  magistrum habuit. Quî cum Cicerônem dîcentem audîvisset,
  flêvisse dîcitur, quod per hunc Graecia êloquentiae laude         {30}
  prîvârêtur.[10]

  Rômam reversus quaestor Siciliam habuit. Nûllîus vêrô quaestûra
  aut grâtior aut clârior fuit; cum mâgna tum esset annônae[11]
  difficultâs, initiô molestus erat Siculîs, quôs côgeret frûmenta in
  urbem mittere; posteâ vêrô, dîligentiam et iûstitiam et cômitâtem[12]
  êius expertî,[13] mâiôrês quaestôrî suô honôrês quam ûllî         {36}
  umquam praetôrî dêtulêrunt. Ê Siciliâ reversus Rômam in causîs
  dîcendîs ita flôruit, ut inter omnês causârum patrônôs[14] et esset
  et habêrêtur prînceps.

  Cônsul deinde factus L. Sergiî Catilînae coniûrâtiônem singulârî  {40}
  virtûte, cônstantiâ, cûrâ compressit.[15] Catilînae proavum,[16]
  M. Sergium, incrêdibilî fortitûdine fuisse Plînius refert.
      Stîpendia[17]
  is fêcit secundô bellô Pûnicô. Secundô stîpendiô[18] dextram      {43}
  manum perdidit: stîpendiîs[18] duôbus ter et vîciês vulnerâtus est:
  ob id neutrâ manû, neutrô pede satis ûtilis, plûrimîsque[19] posteâ
    [[98]]
  stîpendiîs dêbilis[1] mîles erat. Bis ab Hannibale captus, bis[2]
  vinculôrum êius profugus, vîgintî mênsibus nûllô[3] nôn diê in
  catênîs[4] aut compedibus[5] cûstôdîtus. Sinistrâ manû sôlâ quater
  pûgnâvit, duôbus equîs, însidente eô, suffossîs.[6] Dextram sibi
  ferream fêcit eâque religâtâ[7] proeliâtus Cremônam obsidiône     {50}
  exêmit, Placentiam tûtâtus est, duodêna castra hostium in Galliâ
  cêpit. Cêterî profectô, Plînius addit, victôrês hominum fuêre,
  Sergius vîcit etiam fortûnam.

  Singulârem hûius virî glôriam foedê dehonestâvit pronepôtis[8]
  scelus. Hîc enim reî familiâris, quam profûderat, inopiâ          {55}
  multôrumque scelerum cônscientiâ in furôrem âctus et dominandî
  cupiditâte incênsus indîgnâtusque, quod in petîtiône cônsulâtûs
  repulsam[9] passus esset, coniûrâtiône factâ senâtum cônfodere,
  cônsulês trucîdâre,[10] urbem incendere, dîripere aerârium
      cônstituerat.
  Âctum[11] erat dê pulcherrimô imperiô, nisi illa coniûrâtiô       {60}
  in[12] Cicerônem et Antônium cônsulês incidisset, quôrum alter[13]
  indûstriâ rem patefêcit, alter manû[14] oppressit. Cum Cicerô,
  habitô senâtû, in praesentem reum[15] perôrâsset, Catilîna, incendium
  suum ruînâ[16] sê restinctûrum esse minitâns, Rômâ profûgit
  et ad exercitum, quem parâverat, proficîscitur, sîgna inlâtûrus   {65}
  urbî. Sed sociî êius, quî in urbe remânserant, comprehênsî in
  carcere necâtî sunt. A. Fulvius, vir senâtôriî ôrdinis, fîlium,
  iuvenem et ingeniô et fôrmâ inter aequâlês nitentem,[17] prâvô
  cônsiliô Catilînae amîcitiam secûtum inque castra êius ruentem,
  ex mediô itinere retrâctum suppliciô mortis adfêcit, praefâtus[18]
  nôn sê Catilînae illum adversus patriam, sed patriae adversus     {71}
  Catilînam genuisse.[19]

    [[99]]
  Neque eô magis ab inceptô Catilîna dêstitit, sed înfêstîs sîgnîs
  Rômam petêns Antôniî exercitû opprimitur. Quam atrôciter
  dîmicâtum sit exitus docuit: nêmô hostium bellô superfuit;        {75}
  quem quisque in pûgnandô cêperat locum, eum âmissâ animâ[1]
  tegêbat. Catilîna longê â suîs inter hostium cadâvera[2] repertus
  est: pulcherrimâ morte,[3] sî prô patriâ sîc concidisset! Senâtus
  populusque Rômânus Cicerônem patrem patriae appellâvit. Cicerô
  ipse in ôrâtiône prô Sullâ palam praedicat cônsilium patriae      {80}
  servandae fuisse iniectum sibi â diîs, cum Catilîna coniûrâsset
  adversus eam. "Ô diî immortâlês," inquit "vôs profectô
  incendistis tum animum meum cupiditâte cônservandae patriae. Vôs
  âvocâstis mê â côgitâtiônibus omnibus cêterîs et convertistis ad
  salûtem ûnam patriae. Vôs dênique praetulistis mentî meae         {85}
  clârissimum lûmen in tenebrîs tantîs errôris et înscientiae.
  Tribuam enim vôbîs, quae sunt vestra. Nec vêrô possum tantum
  dare ingeniô meô, ut[4] dîspexerim sponte meâ in tempestâte illâ
  turbulentissimâ reî pûblicae, quid esset optimum factû."

  Paucîs post annîs Cicerônî diem dîxit Clôdius tribûnus plêbis,    {90}
  quod cîvês Rômânôs indictâ[5] causâ necâvisset. Senâtus maestus,[6]
  tamquam in pûblicô lûctû, veste[7] mûtâtâ prô eô dêprecâbâtur.
  Cicerô, cum posset armîs salûtem suam dêfendere, mâluit urbe
  cêdere quam suâ causâ caedem fierî. Proficîscentem omnês bonî
  flentês prôsecûtî sunt. Dein Clôdius êdictum prôposuit ut Mârcô   {95}
  Tulliô[8] îgnî et aquâ interdîcerêtur: illîus domum et vîllâs
  incendit. Sed vîs illa nôn diuturna fuit, mox enim tôtus ferê populus
  Rômânus ingentî dêsîderiô Cicerônis reditum flâgitâre coepit et
  mâximô omnium ôrdinum studiô Cicerô in patriam revocâtus est.
    [[100]]
  Nihil per tôtam vîtam Cicerônî itinere, quô in patriam rediit,   {100}
  accidit iûcundius. Obviam[1] eî redeuntî ab ûniversîs itum est: domus
  êius pûblicâ pecûniâ restitûta est.

  Gravissimae illâ tempestâte inter Caesarem et Pompêium ortae
  sunt inimîcitiae, ut rês[2] nisi bellô dîrimî nôn posse vidêrêtur.
  Cicerô quidem summô studiô ênîtêbâtur[3] ut eôs inter sê reconciliâret
  et â bellî cîvîlis calamitâtibus dêterrêret, sed cum neutrum     {106}
  ad pâcem ineundam permovêre posset, Pompêium secûtus est.
  Sed victô Pompêiô, â Caesare victôre veniam ultrô accêpit. Quô
  interfectô Octâviânum, Caesaris hêrêdem, fôvit,[4] Antônium
  impûgnâvit effêcitque ut â senâtû hostis iûdicârêtur.            {110}

  Sed Antônius, initâ cum Octâviânô societâte,[5] Cicerônem iam
  diû sibi inimîcum prôscrîpsit. Quâ rê audîtâ, Cicerô trânsversîs[6]
  itineribus in vîllam, quae â marî proximê aberat, fûgit indeque
  nâvem cônscendit, in Macedoniam trânsitûrus. Unde aliquotiêns
  in altum prôvectum cum modo[7] ventî adversî rettulissent, modo  {115}
  ipse iactâtiônem maris patî nôn posset, taedium[8] tandem eum
  et fugae et vîtae cêpit regressusque ad vîllam "Moriar" inquit
  "in patriâ saepe servâtâ." Satis cônstat, adventantibus percussôribus,
  servôs fortiter fidêliterque parâtôs fuisse ad dîmicandum,
  ipsum dêpônî lectîcam[9] et quiêtôs patî, quod                   {120}
  sors inîqua côgeret, iussisse. Prôminentî[10]
  ex lectîcâ et immôtam cervîcem[11] praebentî[10]
  caput praecîsum est. Manûs quoque abscissae;
  caput relâtum est ad Antônium êiusque
  iussû cum dextrâ manû in rôstrîs positum.                        {125}

    [Illustration: LECTÎCA.]

  Quamdiû rês pûblica Rômâna per eôs gerêbâtur, quibus sê ipsa
  commîserat, in eam cûrâs côgitâtiônêsque ferê omnês suâs cônferêbat
    [[101]]
  Cicerô et plûs[1] operae pônêbat in agendô quam in scrîbendô.
  Cum autem dominâtû ûnîus C. Iûliî Caesaris omnia tenêrentur,
  nôn sê angôribus[2] dêdidit nec indîgnîs homine doctô voluptâtibus.
  Fugiêns cônspectum Forî urbisque rûra peragrâbat abdêbatque      {131}
  sê, quantum licêbat, et sôlus erat. Nihil agere autem cum
  animus nôn posset, exîstimâvit honestissimê molestiâs posse
  dêpônî, sî sê ad philosophiam rettulisset, cuî adulêscêns multum
  temporis tribuerat, et omne studium cûramque convertit ad scrîbendum:
  atque ut cîvibus etiam ôtiôsus[3] aliquid prôdesse[4] posset,    {136}
  êlabôrâvit ut doctiôrês fierent et sapientiôrês, plûraque brevî
  tempore, êversâ rê pûblicâ, scrîpsit, quam multîs annîs eâ stante
  scrîpserat. Sîc fâcundiae[5] et Latînârum litterârum parêns      {139}
  êvâsit[6] pâruitque virôrum sapientium praeceptô, quî docent nôn
  sôlum ex[7] malîs êligere minima oportêre, sed etiam excerpere[8] ex
  hîs ipsîs, sî quid însit bonî.

  Multa exstant facêtê[9] ab eô dicta. Cum Lentulum, generum[10]
  suum, exiguae statûrae hominem, vîdisset longô gladiô accinctum,
  "Quis" inquit "generum meum ad gladium adligâvit?"--Mâtrôna      {145}
  quaedam iûniôrem sê, quam erat, simulâns dictitâbat sê
  trîgintâ tantum annôs habêre; cuî Cicerô "Vêrum est," inquit
  "nam hôc vîgintî annôs audiô."--Caesar, alterô cônsule mortuô
  diê[11] Decembris ûltimâ, Canînium cônsulem hôrâ septimâ in
  reliquam diêî partem renûntiâverat; quem cum plêrîque îrent      {150}
  salûtâtum dê môre, "Fêstînêmus" inquit Cicerô "priusquam abeat
  magistrâtû." Dê eôdem Canîniô scrîpsit Cicerô: "Fuit mîrificâ[12]
  vigilantiâ Canînius, quî tôtô suô cônsulâtû somnum nôn
  vîderit.[13]"

    [Footnote: The following selections have been edited for rapid
    reading or reading at sight:]

    [Footnotes: XXVIII (pages 96-101)

    96.3: 'ancestors.'
    96.4: 'wart.'
    96.5: 'nose'; cf. _nasal_.
    96.6: #ciceris grânô#: 'a tiny chickpea.'
    96.7: = _ut_.
    96.8: 'culture.'
    96.9: 'had spread.'
    97.1: 'applied himself.'
    97.2: 'engaged.'
    97.3: 'courts.'
    97.4: 'pleaded.'
    97.5: 'followed,' 'courted' (cf. _sequor_).
    97.6: 'independence.'
    97.7: 'freedman.'
    97.8: 'fearing.'
    97.9: 'most eloquent.'
    97.10: 'was being deprived.'
    97.11: #annônae difficultâs#: 'a lack of corn.'
    97.12: 'courtesy.'
    97.13: 'having had proof of.'
    97.14: 'lawyers.'
    97.15: 'crushed.'
    97.16: 'great-grandfather.'
    97.17: Cf. XXVII, 19.
    97.18: 'campaign.'
    97.19: #que# here = 'but.'
    98.1: '_though_ disabled.'
    98.2: #bis . . . profugus# = _bis vincula êius profûgit_.
    98.3: #nûllô nôn#: 'every.'
    98.4: 'chains.'
    98.5: 'shackles.'
    98.6: 'slain'; lit., 'stabbed from below.'
    98.7: 'fastened' (to the stump of his arm).
    98.8: 'great-grandson.'
    98.9: 'defeat'; a technical term of Roman politics.
    98.10: 'butcher.'
    98.11: #Âctum erat dê#: 'it would have been all up with.'
    98.12: #in . . . incidisset#: 'happened in the days of.'
    98.13: Cicero.
    98.14: 'prowess.'
    98.15: 'culprit.'
    98.16: 'by a general downfall.'
    98.17: 'conspicuous'; lit., 'shining.'
    98.18: 'having first said.'
    98.19: from _gîgnô_, 'to beget.'
    99.1: 'life.'
    99.2: 'corpses.'
    99.3: Sc. _concidisset_.
    99.4: #ut . . . dîspexerim#: '(as to say) that I should have of my
    own accord clearly perceived.'
    99.5: #indictâ causâ#: 'with their cause unpleaded,' i.e. without
    giving them a trial.
    99.6: 'mourning.'
    99.7: #veste mûtâtâ#: i.e. changing their ordinary attire, which
    was white, for darker robes of mourning.
    99.8: #Tulliô . . . interdîcerêtur#: lit., 'that a ban should be
    laid on Tullius in respect of fire and water,' i.e. that he should
    be outlawed, and every one forbidden to aid him, even with the
    necessaries of life.
    100.1: #Obviam . . . est#: 'all went to meet him.'
    100.2: 'trouble.'
    100.3: 'strove.'
    100.4: 'cherished,' 'supported.'
    100.5: The reference is to the Second Triumvirate.
    100.6: #trânsversîs itineribus#: i.e. by out of the way paths.
    100.7: #modo . . . modo#: 'now . . . now.'
    100.8: 'disgust.'
    100.9: 'litter,' 'sedan chair.'
    100.10: 'leaning out'; sc. _eî_, dat. of disadvantage with
    #praecîsum est#.
    100.11: 'neck.'
    101.1: #plûs . . . scrîbendô#: 'he devoted more of his time to
    practical affairs than to literature.'
    101.2: 'sorrow.'
    101.3: #etiam ôtiôsus#: 'even though at ease,' i.e. not burdened
    with official duties. #ôtiôsus# here, as often = _prîvâtus_.
    101.4: 'benefit.'
    101.5: 'eloquence.' Sc. #Latînae#, to be derived from #Latînârum#.
    101.6: 'became.'
    101.7: #ex . . . oportêre#: we should say, 'of two evils choose
    the less.'
    101.8: 'extract'; lit., 'pluck.'
    101.9: 'wittily.'
    101.10: 'son-in-law.'
    101.11: On this day the consuls went out of office.
    101.12: 'wondrous.'
    101.13: causal subjunctive.]


#XXIX. Marcus Brutus# [[stripped text]]

M. Brutus, ex illa gente, quae Roma Tarquinios eiecerat, oriundus,
Athenis philosophiam, Rhodi eloquentiam didicit. Eius pater, qui Sullae
partibus adversabatur, iussu Pompei interfectus erat, unde Brutus cum eo
graves gesserat simultates. Bello tamen civili Pompei causam, quod
iustior videretur, secutus dolorem suum rei publicae utilitati
posthabuit. Victo Pompeio Brutus a Caesare servatus est et praetor etiam
factus. Postea vero, cum Caesar superbia elatus senatum contemnere et
regnum adfectare coepisset, populus, praesenti statu haud laetus,
vindicem libertatis requirebat. Subscripsere quidam L. Bruti statuae:
"Utinam viveres!" Item ipsius Caesaris statuae: "Brutus, quia reges
eiecit, primus consul factus est; hic, quia consules eiecit, postremo
rex factus est." Inscriptum quoque est M. Bruti praetoris tribunali:
"Dormis, Brute!"

Cognita populi Romani voluntate, Brutus adversus Caesarem conspiravit.
Pridie quam Caesar est occisus, Porcia, Bruti uxor, Catonis filia,
consilii conscia, egresso cubiculum Bruto, cultellum tonsorium quasi
unguium resecandorum causa poposcit eoque velut forte elapso se
vulneravit. Clamore deinde ancillarum in cubiculum revocatus obiurgare
eam coepit, quod tonsoris praeripuisset officium. Cui secreto Porcia
"Non est" inquit "hoc temerarium factum meum, sed in tali statu nostro
mei erga te amoris certissimum indicium. Experiri enim volui, si tibi
propositum ex sententia parum cessisset, quam aequo animo me ferro essem
interemptura." Quibus verbis auditis Brutus ad caelum manus et oculos
sustulisse dicitur et exclamavisse: "Utinam dignus tali coniuge maritus
videri possem!"

Interfecto Caesare, cum Antonius vestem eius sanguinolentam ostentans
populum veluti furore quodam adversus coniuratos inflammasset, Brutus in
Macedoniam concessit ibique apud urbem Philippos adversus Antonium et
Octavianum dimicavit. Victus acie, cum in tumulum se nocte recepisset,
audita Cassii morte, ne in hostium manus veniret, uni ex comitibus latus
transfodiendum praebuit. Antonius Bruti corpus liberto suo sepeliendum
tradidit, quoque honoratius cremaretur, inici ei suum paludamentum
iussit, iacentem non hostem, sed civem deposito existimans odio. Cumque
interceptum a liberto paludamentum comperisset, ira percitus protinus
in eum animadvertit, praefatus: "Quid? tu ignorasti cuius tibi viri
sepulturam commisissem?" Non eadem fuit Octaviani erga Brutum moderatio,
is enim avulsum Bruti caput Romam misit, ut Gai Caesaris statuae
subiceretur. Porcia cum victum et interemptum virum suum cognovisset,
quia ferrum non dabatur, ardentes ore carbones hausit, virilem patris
exitum mulier imitata novo mortis genere.


    [[102]]

  #XXIX. Mârcus Brûtus# [[as printed]]

    [Illustration: BRÛTUS]

  M. Brûtus, ex illâ gente, quae Rômâ Tarquiniôs
  êiêcerat, oriundus,[1] Athênîs philosophiam,
  Rhodî êloquentiam didicit. Êius pater, quî Sullae
  partibus adversâbâtur, iussû Pompêî interfectus
  erat, unde Brûtus cum eô gravês gesserat[2]                        {5}
  simultâtês. Bellô tamen cîvîlî Pompêî causam,
  quod iûstior vidêrêtur, secûtus dolôrem suum reî
  pûblicae ûtilitâtî posthabuit. Victô Pompêiô
  Brûtus â Caesare servâtus est et praetor etiam
  factus. Posteâ vêrô, cum Caesar superbiâ êlâtus senâtum           {10}
  contemnere et rêgnum adfectâre[3] coepisset, populus, praesentî statû
  haud laetus, vindicem[4] lîbêrtâtis requîrêbat. Subscrîpsêre quîdam
  L. Brûtî[5] statuae: "Utinam[6] vîverês!" Item ipsîus Caesaris
  statuae: "Brûtus, quia rêgês êiêcit, prîmus cônsul factus         {14}
  est; hîc, quia cônsulês êiêcit, postrêmô rêx factus est." Înscrîptum
  quoque est M. Brûtî praetôris tribûnâlî: "Dormîs,[7] Brûte!"

  Côgnitâ populî Rômânî voluntâte, Brûtus adversus Caesarem
  cônspîrâvit. Prîdiê quam Caesar est occîsus, Porcia, Brûtî uxor,
  Catônis fîlia, cônsiliî[8] cônscia, êgressô cubiculum[9] Brûtô,   {19}
  cultellum[10] tônsôrium quasi unguium[11] resecandôrum causâ popôscit
  eôque velut forte êlâpsô sê vulnerâvit. Clâmôre deinde ancillârum[12]
  in cubiculum revocâtus obiûrgâre[13] eam coepit, quod tônsôris
  praeripuisset officium. Cuî sêcrêtô Porcia "Nôn est" inquit
  "hôc temerârium[14] factum meum, sed in tâlî statû nostrô meî
  ergâ tê amôris certissimum indicium. Experîrî enim voluî, sî[15]  {25}
    [[103]]
  tibi prôpositum ex sententiâ parum cessisset, quam aequô animô
  mê ferrô essem interêmptûra." Quibus verbîs audîtîs Brûtus ad
  caelum manûs et oculôs sustulisse dîcitur et exclâmâvisse: "Utinam
  dîgnus tâlî côniuge marîtus vidêrî possem!"

  Interfectô Caesare, cum Antônius vestem êius sanguinolentam[1]    {30}
  ostentâns populum velutî furôre quôdam adversus coniûrâtôs
  înflammâsset, Brûtus in Macedoniam concessit ibique apud urbem
  Philippôs adversus Antônium et Octâviânum dîmicâvit. Victus
  aciê, cum in tumulum[2] sê nocte recêpisset, audîtâ Cassiî morte,
  nê in hostium manûs venîret, ûnî ex comitibus latus trânsfodiendum
  praebuit. Antônius Brûtî corpus lîbertô suô sepeliendum[3]        {36}
  trâdidit, quôque[4] honôrâtius cremârêtur, inicî eî suum
  palûdâmentum[5] iussit, iacentem[6] nôn hostem, sed cîvem dêpositô
  exîstimâns odiô. Cumque interceptum â lîbertô palûdâmentum
  comperisset, îrâ percitus[7] prôtinus in eum animadvertit, praefâtus:
  "Quid? tû îgnôrâstî cûius tibi virî sepultûram commîsissem?"      {41}
  Nôn eadem fuit Octâviânî ergâ Brûtum moderâtiô, is
  enim âvulsum[8] Brûtî caput Rômam mîsit, ut Gâî Caesaris
  statuae subicerêtur. Porcia cum victum et interêmptum virum suum
  côgnôvisset, quia ferrum nôn dabâtur, ârdentês ôre carbônes[9]    {45}
  hausit, virîlem patris[10] exitum mulier[11] imitâta novô mortis
  genere.

    [Footnotes: XXIX (pages 102-103)

    102.1: = _ortus, nâtus_.
    102.2: _simultâtês gerere_ = 'to carry on a feud.'
    102.3: 'to aim at.'
    102.4: 'champion.'
    102.5: The Brutus of selection IX.
    102.6: #Utinam vîverês!# 'O that you were yet alive.' The
    subjunctive here expresses a wish or prayer; cf. l. 29.
    102.7: 'you're fast asleep.'
    102.8: #cônsiliî cônscia#: 'who was aware of,' etc.
    102.9: 'sleeping-room.'
    102.10: #cultellum tônsôrium#: 'a barber's knife.'
    102.11: 'nails.'
    102.12: 'maids.'
    102.13: 'scold.'
    102.14: 'heedless,' 'random.'
    102.15: #sî . . . cessisset#: 'if your plan did not turn out
    according to your expectations.' Join with what follows.
    103.1: 'bloody.'
    103.2: 'hill.'
    103.3: _sepelîre_ = 'to dispose of a body,' whether by burial or
    by cremation.
    103.4: #quôque# = 'and in order that.'
    103.5: 'cloak.'
    103.6: 'the dead man.'
    103.7: 'thoroughly aroused.'
    103.8: 'torn (from the body).'
    103.9: 'coals.'
    103.10: See Vocab., _Catô_.
    103.11: 'woman though she was.']


#XXX. Octavianus Caesar Augustus# [[stripped text]]

Octavianus, Iuliae, Gai Caesaris sororis, nepos, quartum annum agens
patrem amisit. Ab avunculo adoptatus profectum eum in Hispanias adversus
Gnaei Pompei liberos secutus est. Deinde ab eo Apolloniam missus studiis
vacavit. Utque primum occisum Caesarem heredemque se comperit, in urbem
regressus hereditatem adiit, nomen Caesaris sumpsit conlectoque
veteranorum exercitu opem Decimo Bruto tulit, qui ab Antonio Mutinae
obsidebatur. Cum autem urbis aditu prohiberetur, ut Brutum de omnibus
rebus certiorem faceret, primo litteras misit plumbeis laminis
inscriptas, quas ad bracchium religatas urinatores Scultennam amnem
transnantes ad Brutum deferebant. Quin et avibus internuntiis utebatur.
Columbis enim, quas inclusas ante fame adfecerat, epistulas ad collum
religabat easque a proximo moenibus loco emittebat. Illae, lucis cibique
avidae, altissima aedificiorum petentes excipiebantur a Decimo Bruto,
qui eo modo de omnibus rebus certior fiebat, utique postquam disposito
quibusdam locis cibo columbas illuc devolare instituerat.

Bellum Mutinense Octavianus duobus proeliis confecit, quorum in altero
non ducis modo, sed militis etiam functus est officio atque in media
dimicatione, aquilifero legionis suae graviter saucio, aquilam umeris
subisse diuque fertur portasse. Postea reconciliata cum Antonio
gratiaiunctisque cum eo copiis, ut Gai Caesaris necem ulcisceretur, ad
urbem hostiliter accessit misitque qui nomine exercitus sibi consulatum
deposcerent. Cunctante senatu centurio, princeps legationis, reiecto
sagulo, ostendens gladii capulum non dubitavit in Curia dicere: "Hic
faciet, si vos non feceritis."

Ita cum Octavianus vicesimo aetatis anno consulatum invasisset, pacem
fecit cum Antonio et Lepido, ita ut triumviri rei publicae constituendae
per quinquennium essent ipse et Lepidus et Antonius, et ut suos quisque
inimicos proscriberent. Quae proscriptio Sullana longe crudelior fuit.
Exstant autem ex ea multa vel extremae impietatis vel mirae fidei ac
constantiae exempla. T. Toranius, triumvirorum partes secutus,
proscripti patris sui, praetorii et ornati viri, latebras, aetatem
notasque corporis, quibus agnosci posset, centurionibus edidit, qui eum
persecuti sunt. Alius quidam cum proscriptum se cognovisset, ad clientem
suum confugit; sed filius eius per ipsa vestigia patris militibus ductis
occidendum eum in conspectu suo obiecit.

Cum C. Plotius Plancus a triumviris proscriptus in regione Salernitana
lateret, servi eius, comprehensi multumque ac diu torti, negabant se
scire ubi dominus esset. Non sustinuit deinde Plancus tam fideles tamque
boni exempli servos ulterius cruciari; sed processit in medium
iugulumque gladiis militum obiecit. Senatoris cuiusdam servus cum ad
dominum proscriptum occidendum milites advenisse cognosset, commutata
cum eo veste, permutato etiam anulo, illum postico clam emisit, se autem
in cubiculum ad lectulum recepit et ut dominum occidi passus est.
"Quanti viri est" addit Seneca, "cum praemia proditionis ingentia
ostendantur, praemium fidei mortem concupiscere!"

Octavianus deinde M. Brutum, interfectorem Caesaris, bello persecutus id
bellum, quamquam invalidus atque aeger, duplici proelio transegit;
quorum priore castris exutus vix fuga evasit. Victor acerbissime se
gessit: in nobilissimum quemque captivum non sine verborum contumelia
saeviit. Uni suppliciter sepulturam precanti respondisse dicitur iam
istam in volucrum fore potestate. Alios, patrem et filium, pro vita
rogantes sortiri fertur iussisse ut alterutri concederetur, ac cum,
patre quia se obtulerat occiso, filius quoque voluntaria occubuisset
nece, spectasse utrumque morientem. Orare veniam vel excusare se
conantibus, una voce occurrebat moriendum esse. Scribunt quidam
trecentos ex dediticiis electos ad aram divo Iulio exstructam Idibus
Martiis hostiarum more mactatos.

Abalienatus postea est ab Antonio, quod is, repudiata Octavia sorore,
Cleopatram, Aegypti reginam, duxisset uxorem: quae quidem mulier cum
Antonio luxu et deliciis certabat. Una se cena centies sestertium
absumpturam aliquando dixerat. Cupiebat discere Antonius, sed fieri
posse non arbitrabatur. Postero igitur die magnificam alias cenam, sed
cottidianam Antonio apposuit inridenti, quod promisso stare non
potuisset. At illa inferri mensam secundam iussit. Ex praecepto ministri
unum tantum vas ante eam posuere aceti, cuius asperitas visque
margaritas resolvit. Exspectante igitur Antonio quidnam esset actura,
margaritam, quam auribus gerebat, detraxit et aceto liquefactam
absorbuit. Victum Antonium omnes, qui aderant, pronuntiaverunt.

Octavianus cum Antonio apud Actium, qui locus est in Epiro, navali
proelio dimicavit. Victum et fugientem persecutus Aegyptum petiit, et
Alexandream, quo Antonius cum Cleopatra confugerat, obsedit. Antonius in
ultima rerum desperatione, cum habitu regis in solio regali sedisset,
mortem sibi ipse conscivit. Cleopatra, quam Octavianus, Alexandrea in
potestatem redacta, magno opere cupiebat vivam comprehendi triumphoque
servari, aspidem sibi adferendam curavit eiusque morsu periit.
Cleopatrae mortuae communem cum Antonio sepulturam tribuit.

Tandem Octavianus, hostibus victis solus imperio potitus, clementem se
exhibuit. Omnia deinceps in eo plena mansuetudinis et humanitatis.
Multis ignovit vel iis qui saepe graviter eum offenderant. Reversus in
Italiam triumphans Romam ingressus est. Tum bellis toto orbe compositis
Iani gemini portas sua manu clausit, quae bis tantum antea clausae
fuerant, primum sub Numa rege, iterum post primum Punicum bellum. Tunc
omnes praeteritorum malorum oblivio cepit populusque Romanus praesentis
otii laetitia perfruebatur. Octaviano maximi honores a senatu delati
sunt. Ipse Augustus cognominatus et in honorem eius mensis Sextilis
eodem nomine appellatus est, quod illo mense bellis civilibus finis
esset impositus. Patris patriae cognomen universi maximo consensu
detulerunt ei. Deferentibus lacrimans respondit Augustus his verbis:
"Compos factus votorum meorum, patres conscripti, quid habeo aliud, quod
deos immortales precer, quam ut hunc consensum vestrum ad ultimum vitae
finem mihi perferre liceat!"

Dictaturam magna vi offerente populo deprecatus est. Domini
appellationem semper exhorruit eamque sibi tribui edicto vetuit. Immo de
restituenda re publica non semel cogitavit, sed reputans et se privatum
non sine periculo fore, et rem publicam plurium arbitrio commissum iri,
summam retinuit potestatem, id vero studuit ne quem novi status
paeniteret. Bene de iis etiam, quos adversarios expertus erat, et
sentiebat et loquebatur. Legentem aliquando unum e nepotibus invenit;
cumque puer territus volumen Ciceronis, quod manu tenebat, veste
tegeret, Augustus librum cepit eoque statim reddito, "Hic vir," inquit
"fili mi, doctus fuit et patriae amans."

Pedibus saepe per urbem incedebat summaque comitate adeuntes excipiebat.
Convenit aliquando eum veteranus miles, qui vocatus in ius
periclitabatur rogavitque ut sibi adesset. Statim Augustus unum e
comitatu suo elegit advocatum, qui litigatorem commendaret. Tum
veteranus exclamavit: "At non ego, te periclitante bello Actiaco,
vicarium quaesivi, sed ipse pro te pugnavi," simulque detexit
cicatrices. Erubuit Augustus atque ipse venit in advocationem.

Cum post Actiacam victoriam Octavianus Romam reverteretur, occurrit ei
inter gratulantes opifex quidam corvum tenens, quem instituerat haec
dicere: "Ave, Caesar, victor, imperator!" Miratus Caesar officiosam avem
viginti milibus nummorum emit. Socius opificis, ad quem nihil ex illa
liberalitate pervenerat, adfirmavit Caesari habere illum et alium
corvum, quem ut adferre cogeretur rogavit. Adlatus verba, quae
didicerat, expressit: "Ave, Antoni, victor, imperator!" Nihil
exasperatus Caesar satis duxit iubere illum dividere donativum cum
contubernali. Salutatus similiter a psittaco emi eum iussit.

Exemplum sutorem pauperem sollicitavit ut corvum institueret ad parem
salutationem. Qui impendio exhaustus saepe ad avem non respondentem
dicere solebat "Opera et impensa periit!" Aliquando tamen corvus coepit
dicere dictam salutationem. Hac audita, dum transit, Augustus respondit:
"Satis domi talium salutatorum habeo." Superfuit corvo memoria, ut et
illa, quibus dominum querentem solebat audire, subtexeret: "Opera et
impensa periit." Ad quod Caesar risit emique avem iussit, quanti nullam
ante emerat.

Solebat Graeculus quidam descendenti e palatio Caesari honorificum
aliquod epigramma porrigere. Id cum frustra saepe fecisset et tamen
rursus eum idem facturum duxisset Augustus, breve sua manu in charta
exaravit Graecum epigramma et Graeculo advenienti obviam misit. Ille
inter legendum laudare mirarique tam voce quam vultu gestuque. Deinde
cum accessisset ad sellam, qua Caesar vehebatur, demissa in pauperem
crumenam manu paucos denarios protulit, quos principi daret, dixitque se
plus daturum fuisse, si plus habuisset. Secuto omnium risu,
dispensatorem Caesar vocavit et satis grandem pecuniae summam numerari
Graeculo iussit.

Augustus fere nulli se invitanti negabat. Exceptus igitur a quodam cena
satis parca et paene cottidiana, hoc tantum insusurravit: "Non putabam
me tibi esse tam familiarem." Cum aliquando apud Pollionem quendam
cenaret fregissetque unus e servis vas crystallinum, rapi eum ad mortem
Pollio iussit et obici muraenis quas ingens piscina continebat. Evasit e
manibus puer et ad pedes Caesaris confugit, nihil aliud petiturus quam
ut aliter periret nec esca piscium fieret. Motus est novo crudelitatis
genere Caesar et illum quidem mitti, crystallina autem omnia coram se
frangi iussit complerique piscinam.

Augustus in quadam villa aegrotans noctes inquietas agebat, rumpente
somnum eius crebro noctuae cantu. Qua molestia cum liberari se
vehementer cupere significasset, miles quidam, aucupii peritus, noctuam
prehendendam curavit, vivamque Augusto attulit, spe ingentis praemii.
Cui cum Augustus mille nummos dari iussisset, ille minus dignum praemium
existimans dicere ausus est: "Malo ut vivat," et avem dimisit.
Imperatori nec ad irascendum causa deerat nec ad ulciscendum potestas:
hanc tamen iniuriam aequo animo tulit Augustus hominemque impunitum
abire passus est.

Augustus amicitias neque facile admisit et constantissime retinuit.
Imprimis familiarem habuit Maecenatem, equitem Romanum; qui ea, qua apud
principem valebat, gratia ita semper usus est, ut prodesset omnibus,
quibus posset, noceret nemini. Ius aliquando dicebat Augustus et multos
capite damnaturus videbatur. Aderat tum Maecenas, qui per circumstantium
turbam perrumpere et ad tribunal propius accedere conabatur. Quod cum
frustra tentasset, haec verba in tabella scripsit: "Surge tandem,
carnifex!" eamque tabellam ad Augustum proiecit. Qua lecta is statim
surrexit neque quisquam est morte multatus.

Habitavit Augustus in aedibus modicis, neque laxitate neque cultu
conspicuis, ac per annos amplius quadraginta in eodem cubiculo hieme et
aestate mansit. Suppellex quoque eius vix privatae elegantiae erat. Raro
veste alia usus est quam confecta ab uxore, sorore, filia neptibusque.
Item tamen Romam, quam pro maiestate imperii non satis ornatam
invenerat, adeo excoluit, ut iure gloriaretur marmoream se relinquere,
quam latericiam accepisset.

Forma fuit Augustus eximia et per omnes aetatis gradus venustissima.
Erat tamen omnis lenocinii neglegens et in capite comendo tam
incuriosus, ut eo ipso tempore, quo illud tonsoribus committeret, aut
legeret aliquid aut etiam scriberet.

Paucis annis antequam moreretur, gravissimam in Germania accepit cladem,
tribus legionibus cum duce Varo legatisque et auxiliis omnibus caesis.
Hac nuntiata excubias per urbem indixit, ne quis tumultus exsisteret, et
magnos ludos Iovi optimo maximo vovit, si res publica in meliorem statum
vertisset. Adeo denique consternatum ferunt, ut, per continuos menses
barba capilloque submisso, caput interdum foribus inlideret, vociferans:
"Quintili Vare, legiones redde!" diemque cladis quotannis maestum
habuerit ac lugubrem.

Tandem adflicta valetudine in Campaniam concessit, ubi, remisso ad otium
animo, nullo hilaritatis genere abstinuit. Supremo vitae die petito
speculo capillum sibi comi iussit et amicos circumstantes percontatus
ecquid iis videretur mimum vitae commode transegisse, adiecit solitam
clausulam: "Edite strepitum vosque omnes cum gaudio applaudite." Obiit
Nolae sextum et septuagesimum annum agens.


  #XXX. Octâviânus Caesar Augustus# [[as printed]]

  Octâviânus, Iûliae, Gâî Caesaris sorôris, nepôs, quârtum annum
  agêns patrem âmîsit. Ab avunculô adoptâtus profectum eum in
  Hispâniâs[12] adversus Gnaeî Pompêî lîberôs secûtus est. Deinde
  ab eô Apollôniam missus studiîs[13] vacâvit. Utque prîmum occîsum
    [[104]]
  Caesarem hêrêdemque sê comperit, in urbem regressus                {5}
  hêrêditâtem adiit, nômen Caesaris sûmpsit conlêctôque veterânôrum
  exercitû opem Decimô[1] Brûtô tulit, quî ab
  Antôniô Mutinae obsidêbâtur. Cum autem
  urbis aditû prohibêrêtur, ut Brûtum dê omnibus
  rêbus certiôrem faceret, prîmô lîtterâs                           {10}
  mîsit plumbeîs[2] lâminîs înscrîptâs, quâs ad
  bracchium[3] religâtâs ûrînâtôrês[4] Scultennam
  amnem trânsnantês[5] ad Brûtum dêferêbant.
  Quîn et avibus internûntiîs ûtêbâtur. Columbîs[6]
  enim, quâs inclûsâs ante famê[7] adfêcerat,                       {15}
  epistulâs ad collum religâbat eâsque â proximô moenibus locô
  êmittêbat. Illae, lûcis cibîque avidae, altissima aedificiôrum
  petentês excipiêbantur â Decimô Brûtô, quî eô modô dê omnibus
  rêbus certior fîêbat, utique[8] postquam dispositô quibusdam locîs
  cibô columbâs illûc dêvolâre înstituerat.                         {20}

    [Illustration: YOUNG AUGUSTUS]

  Bellum Mutinênse Octâviânus duôbus proeliîs cônfêcit, quôrum
  in alterô nôn ducis modo, sed mîlitis etiam fûnctus est officiô
  atque in mediâ dîmicâtiône, aquiliferô legiônis suae graviter
  sauciô,[9] aquilam umerîs subîsse diûque fertur portâsse. Posteâ
  reconciliâtâ cum Antôniô grâtiâ[10]iûnctîsque cum eô côpiîs, ut   {25}
  Gâî Caesaris necem ulcîscerêtur, ad urbem hostîliter accessit
  mîsitque quî nômine exercitûs sibi cônsulâtum dêpôscerent.
  Cunctante senâtû centuriô, prînceps lêgâtiônis, rêiectô sagulô,[11]
  ostendêns gladiî capulum[12] nôn dubitâvit[13] in Cûriâ dîcere: "Hîc
  faciet, sî vôs nôn fêceritis."                                    {30}

  Ita cum Octâviânus vîcêsimô aetâtis annô cônsulâtum invâsisset,
  pâcem fêcit cum Antôniô et Lepidô, ita ut triumvirî reî
    [[105]]
  pûblicae cônstituendae per quînquennium essent ipse et Lepidus
  et Antônius, et ut suôs quisque inimîcôs prôscrîberent. Quae
  prôscrîptiô Sullânâ longê crûdêlior fuit. Exstant autem ex eâ     {35}
  multa vel extrêmae impietâtis vel mîrae fideî âc cônstantiae
  exempla. T. Tôranius, triumvirôrum partês secûtus, prôscrîptî
  patris suî, praetôriî et ôrnâtî virî, latebrâs, aetâtem notâsque[1]
  corporis, quibus âgnôscî posset, centuriônibus êdidit, quî eum
  persecûtî sunt. Alius quîdam cum prôscrîptum sê côgnôvisset,      {40}
  ad clientem suum cônfûgit; sed fîlius êius per ipsa vêstîgia
  patris mîlitibus ductîs occîdendum eum in cônspectû suô obiêcit.

  Cum C. Plôtius Plancus â triumvirîs prôscrîptus in regiône
  Salernitânâ[2] latêret, servî êius, comprehênsî multumque âc diû
  tortî,[3] negâbant sê scîre ubi dominus esset. Nôn sustinuit deinde
  Plancus tam fidêlês tamque bonî exemplî servôs ulterius cruciârî;
  sed prôcessit in medium iugulumque gladiîs mîlitum obiêcit.       {47}
  Senâtôris cûiusdam servus cum ad dominum prôscrîptum occîdendum
  mîlitês advênisse côgnôsset, commûtâtâ cum eô veste,
  permûtâtô etiam ânulô, illum postîcô[4] clam êmîsit, sê autem in  {50}
  cubiculum ad lectulum[5] recêpit et ut dominum occîdî passus est.
  "Quantî[6] virî est" addit Seneca,[7] "cum praemia prôditiônis
  ingentia ostendantur, praemium fideî mortem concupîscere!"

  Octâviânus deinde M. Brûtum, interfectôrem Caesaris, bellô
  persecûtus id bellum, quamquam invalidus atque aeger, duplicî     {55}
  proeliô trânsêgit; quôrum priôre castrîs exûtus[8] vix fugâ êvâsit.
  Victor acerbissimê sê gessit: in nôbilissimum quemque captîvum
  nôn sine verbôrum contumêliâ saeviit. Ûnî suppliciter sepultûram
  precantî respondisse dîcitur iam istam in volucrum fore
  potestâte. Aliôs, patrem et fîlium, prô vîtâ rogantês sortîrî     {60}
  fertur iussisse ut alterutrî[9] concêderêtur, ac cum, patre quia
    [[106]]
  sê obtulerat occîsô, fîlius quoque voluntâriâ occubuisset nece,
  spectâsse utrumque morientem. Ôrâre veniam vel excûsâre sê
  cônantibus, ûnâ vôce occurrêbat[1] moriendum esse. Scrîbunt
  quîdam trecentôs ex dêditîciîs[2] êlêctôs ad âram dîvô[3] Iûliô   {65}
  exstrûctam Îdibus Mârtiîs hostiârum[4] môre mactâtôs.[5]

  Abaliênâtus posteâ est ab Antôniô, quod is, repudiâtâ Octâviâ
  sorôre, Cleopatram, Aegyptî rêgînam, dûxisset uxôrem: quae quidem
  mulier cum Antôniô lûxû et dêliciîs[6] certâbat. Ûnâ sê cênâ
  centiês[7] sêstertium absûmptûram aliquandô dîxerat. Cupiêbat     {70}
  dîscere Antônius, sed fierî posse nôn arbitrâbâtur. Posterô igitur
  diê mâgnificam[8] aliâs cênam, sed cottîdiânam Antôniô apposuit
  inrîdentî, quod prômissô stâre nôn potuisset. At illa înferrî
  mênsam[9] secundam iussit. Ex praeceptô ministrî ûnum tantum      {74}
  vâs ante eam posuêre acêtî,[10] cûius asperitâs vîsque margarîtâs[11]
  resolvit.[12] Exspectante igitur Antôniô quidnam esset âctûra,
  margarîtam, quam auribus gerêbat, dêtrâxit et acêtô liquefactam
  absorbuit. Victum Antônium omnês, quî aderant, prônûntiâvêrunt.   {78}

  Octâviânus cum Antôniô apud Actium, quî locus est in Êpîrô,       {80}
  nâvâlî proeliô dîmicâvit. Victum et fugientem persecûtus Aegyptum
  petiit, et Alexandrêam, quô Antônius cum Cleopatrâ cônfûgerat,
  obsêdit. Antônius in ultimâ rêrum dêspêrâtiône, cum
  habitû rêgis in soliô[13] rêgâlî sêdisset, mortem sibi ipse cônscîvit.
  Cleopatra, quam Octâviânus, Alexandrêâ in potestâtem redâctâ,     {85}
  mâgnô opere cupiêbat vîvam comprehendî triumphôque servârî,
  aspidem[14] sibi adferendam cûrâvit êiusque morsû periit. Cleopatrae
  mortuae commûnem cum Antôniô sepultûram tribuit.

    [[107]]
  Tandem Octâviânus, hostibus victîs sôlus imperiô potîtus,
  clêmentem sê exhibuit.[1] Omnia deinceps in eô plêna mânsuêtûdinis[2]
  et hûmânitâtis. Multîs îgnôvit vel iîs quî saepe graviter         {91}
  eum offenderant. Reversus in Îtaliam triumphâns Rômam
  ingressus est. Tum bellîs tôtô orbe compositîs Iânî geminî portâs
  suâ manû clausit, quae bis tantum anteâ clausae fuerant, prîmum
  sub Numâ rêge, iterum post prîmum Pûnicum bellum. Tunc            {95}
  omnês praeteritôrum malôrum oblîviô cêpit populusque Rômânus
  praesentis ôtiî laetitiâ perfruêbâtur. Octâviânô mâximî honôrês
  â senâtû dêlâtî sunt. Ipse Augustus côgnôminâtus et in honôrem
  êius mênsis Sextîlis[3] eôdem nômine appellâtus est, quod illô
  mênse bellîs cîvîlibus fînis esset impositus. Patris patriae     {100}
  côgnômen ûniversî mâximô cônsênsû dêtulêrunt eî. Dêferentibus
  lacrimâns respondit Augustus hîs verbîs: "Compos[4] factus
  vôtôrum meôrum, patrês conscrîptî, quid habeô aliud, quod deôs
  immortâlês precer, quam ut hunc cônsênsum vestrum ad ultimum
  vîtae fînem mihi perferre liceat!"                               {105}

  Dictâtûram mâgnâ vî offerente populô dêprecâtus est. Dominî
  appellâtiônem semper exhorruit eamque sibi tribuî êdictô vetuit.
  Immô[5] dê restituendâ rê pûblicâ nôn semel côgitâvit, sed
  reputâns et sê prîvâtum nôn sine perîculô fore, et rem pûblicam
  plûrium arbitriô commissum[6] îrî, summam retinuit potestâtem,   {110}
  id vêrô studuit nê quem novî statûs paenitêret. Bene dê iîs
  etiam, quôs adversâriôs expertus erat, et sentiêbat et loquêbâtur.
  Legentem aliquandô ûnum ê nepôtibus invênit; cumque puer
  territus volûmen Cicerônis, quod manû tenêbat, veste tegeret,
  Augustus librum cêpit eôque statim redditô, "Hîc vir," inquit    {115}
  "fîlî mî, doctus fuit et patriae amâns."

    [[108]]
  Pedibus saepe per urbem incêdêbat summâque cômitâte adeuntês
  excipiêbat. Convênit[1] aliquandô eum veterânus mîles, quî
  vocâtus in iûs perîclitâbâtur rogâvitque ut sibi adesset. Statim
  Augustus ûnum ê comitâtû[2] suô êlêgit advocâtum, quî lîtigâtôrem
  commendâret. Tum veterânus exclâmâvit: "At nôn ego,              {121}
  tê perîclitante bellô Actiacô, vicârium[3] quaesîvî, sed ipse prô tê
  pûgnâvî," simulque dêtêxit cicâtrîcês.[4] Êrubuit[5] Augustus
  atque ipse vênit in advocâtiônem.

  Cum post Actiacam victôriam Octâviânus Rômam reverterêtur,       {125}
  occurrit eî inter grâtulantês opifex[6] quîdam corvum[7] tenêns,
  quem înstituerat haec dîcere: "Avê,[8] Caesar, victor, imperâtor!"
  Mîrâtus Caesar officiôsam avem vîgintî mîlibus nummôrum[9] êmit.
  Socius opificis, ad quem nihil ex illâ lîberâlitâte pervênerat,
  adfîrmâvit Caesarî habêre illum et alium corvum, quem ut adferre
  côgerêtur rogâvit. Adlâtus verba, quae didicerat, expressit:     {131}
  "Avê, Antônî, victor, imperâtor!" Nihil exasperâtus Caesar
  satis dûxit iubêre illum dîvidere dônâtîvum[10] cum contubernâlî.
  Salûtâtus similiter â psittacô[11] emî eum iussit.

  Exemplum sûtôrem[12] pauperem sollicitâvit ut corvum înstitueret
  ad parem salûtâtiônem. Quî impendiô[13] exhaustus saepe ad       {136}
  avem nôn respondentem dîcere solêbat "Opera et impênsa[13]
  periit[14]!" Aliquandô tamen corvus coepit dîcere dictam
  salûtâtiônem. Hâc audîtâ, dum trânsit, Augustus respondit: "Satis
  domî tâlium salûtâtôrum habeô." Superfuit corvô memoria, ut      {140}
  et illa, quibus dominum querentem solêbat audîre, subtexeret[15]:
  "Opera et impênsa periit." Ad quod Caesar rîsit emîque avem
  iussit, quantî[16] nûllam ante êmerat.

  Solêbat Graeculus quîdam dêscendentî ê palâtiô Caesarî honôrificum
  aliquod epigramma porrigere.[17] Id cum frûstrâ saepe fêcisset   {145}
    [[109]]
  et tamen rûrsus eum idem factûrum dûxisset Augustus, breve
  suâ manû in chartâ[1] exarâvit[2] Graecum epigramma et Graeculô
  advenientî obviam mîsit. Ille inter legendum laudâre[3] mîrârîque[3]
  tam[4] vôce quam[4] vultû gestûque. Deinde cum accessisset       {149}
  ad sellam, quâ Caesar vehêbâtur, dêmissâ in pauperem crumênam[5]
  manû paucôs dênâriôs[6] prôtulit, quôs prîncipî daret, dîxitque
  sê plûs datûrum fuisse, sî plûs habuisset. Secûtô omnium
  rîsû, dispênsâtôrem[7] Caesar vocâvit et satis grandem pecûniae
  summam numerârî Graeculô iussit.

  Augustus ferê nûllî sê invîtantî negâbat. Exceptus igitur â      {155}
  quôdam cênâ satis parcâ et paene cottîdiânâ, hôc tantum
  însusurrâvit[8]: "Nôn putâbam mê tibi esse tam familiârem." Cum
  aliquandô apud Pôlliônem quendam cênâret frêgissetque ûnus ê
  servîs vâs crystallinum, rapî eum ad mortem Pôlliô iussit et     {159}
  obicî mûraenîs[9] quâs ingêns piscîna[10] continêbat. Êvâsit ê manibus
  puer et ad pedês Caesaris cônfûgit, nihil aliud petîtûrus quam
  ut aliter perîret nec êsca[11] piscium fieret. Môtus est novô
      crûdêlitâtis
  genere Caesar et illum quidem mittî,[12] crystallina autem
  omnia côram sê frangî iussit complêrîque piscînam.

  Augustus in quâdam vîllâ aegrôtâns noctês inquiêtâs agêbat,      {165}
  rumpente somnum êius crêbrô noctuae[13] cantû. Quâ molestiâ cum
  lîberârî sê vehementer cupere sîgnificâsset, mîles quîdam, aucupiî
  perîtus, noctuam prehendendam cûrâvit, vîvamque Augustô attulit,
  spê ingentis praemiî. Cuî cum Augustus mîlle nummôs[14] darî     {169}
  iussisset, ille minus dîgnum praemium exîstimâns dîcere ausus est:
  "Mâlô ut vîvat," et avem dîmîsit. Imperâtôrî nec ad îrâscendum
  causa deerat nec ad ulcîscendum potestâs: hanc tamen iniûriam
  aequô animô tulit Augustus hominemque impûnîtum abîre passus est.

    [[110]]
  Augustus amîcitiâs neque facile admîsit et cônstantissimê retinuit.
  Imprîmîs familiârem habuit Maecênâtem, equitem Rômânum;          {175}
  quî eâ, quâ apud prîncipem valêbat, grâtiâ ita semper ûsus
  est, ut prôdesset omnibus, quibus posset, nocêret nêminî. Iûs
  aliquandô dîcêbat Augustus et multôs capite damnâtûrus vidêbâtur.
  Aderat tum Maecênâs, quî per
  circumstantium turbam perrumpere et                              {180}
  ad tribûnal propius accêdere cônâbâtur.
  Quod cum frûstrâ tentâsset, haec verba
  in tabellâ scrîpsit: "Surge tandem,
  carnifex[1]!" eamque tabellam ad Augustum
  prôiêcit. Quâ lêctâ is statim surrêxit                           {185}
  neque quisquam est morte multâtus.

    [Illustration: AUGUSTUS]

  Habitâvit Augustus in aedibus modicîs,
  neque laxitâte[2] neque cultû[3] cônspicuîs,
  ac per annôs amplius quadrâgintâ
  in eôdem cubiculô hieme et aestâte                               {190}
  mânsit. Suppellex[4] quoque êius vix
  prîvâtae êlegantiae erat. Rârô veste
  aliâ ûsus est quam cônfectâ ab uxôre,
  sorôre, fîliâ neptibusque.[5] Item tamen
  Rômam, quam prô mâiestâte imperiî nôn                            {195}
  satis ôrnâtam invênerat, adeô excoluit, ut iûre glôriârêtur
  marmoream sê relinquere, quam laterîciam[6] accêpisset.

  Fôrmâ fuit Augustus eximiâ et per omnês aetâtis gradûs
  venustissimâ. Erat tamen omnis lênôciniî[7] neglegêns et in capite
  cômendô tam incûriôsus, ut eô ipsô tempore, quô illud tônsôribus
  committeret, aut legeret aliquid aut etiam scrîberet.            {201}

  Paucîs annîs antequam morerêtur, gravissimam in Germâniâ
  accêpit clâdem, tribus legiônibus cum duce Vârô lêgâtîsque et
    [[111]]
  auxiliîs omnibus caesîs. Hâc nûntiâtâ excubiâs[1] per urbem      {204}
  indîxit, nê quis tumultus exsisteret, et mâgnôs lûdôs Iovî optimô
  mâximô vôvit, sî rês pûblica in meliôrem statum vertisset. Adeô
  dênique[2] cônsternâtum ferunt, ut, per continuôs mênsês barbâ
  capillôque submissô,[3] caput interdum foribus inlîderet, vôciferâns:
  "Quîntilî Vâre, legiônês redde!" diemque clâdis quotannîs
  maestum habuerit ac lûgubrem.                                    {210}

  Tandem adflîctâ valêtûdine in Campâniam concessit, ubi, remissô
  ad ôtium animô, nûllô hilaritâtis genere abstinuit. Suprêmô vîtae
  diê petîtô speculô[4] capillum sibi cômî iussit et amîcôs
  circumstantês percontâtus ecquid iîs vidêrêtur mîmum[5] vîtae commodê
  trânsêgisse, adiêcit solitam clausulam[6]: "Êdite strepitum      {215}
  vôsque omnês cum gaudiô applaudite." Obiit Nôlae sextum et
  septuâgêsimum annum agêns.

    [Footnotes: XXX (pages 103-111)

    103.12: See Vocab., _Hispânia_.
    103.13: #studiîs vacâbat#: 'had time for (i.e. devoted himself to)
    study.'
    104.1: At Caesar's death he was governor of Cisalpine Gaul. Antony
    carried a law allotting this province to himself, and then
    undertook to expel Brutus.
    104.2: #plumbeîs lâminîs#: 'leaden plates.'
    104.3: 'arm.'
    104.4: 'divers.'
    104.5: 'by swimming across.'
    104.6: 'doves.'
    104.7: 'hunger.'
    104.8: 'especially.'
    104.9: '(being) wounded.'
    104.10: = _amîcitiâ_.
    104.11: 'cloak.'
    104.12: 'hilt.'
    104.13: 'hesitate.'
    105.1: 'marks.'
    105.2: 'of Salernum,' a town in Campania; the modern Salerno.
    105.3: 'though tortured.'
    105.4: 'by a back door.'
    105.5: 'couch.'
    105.6: #Quantî . . . est#: 'What marvelous manhood it shows.'
    105.7: A philosopher of the first century A.D.
    105.8: 'stripped of.'
    105.9: 'to one or the other,' i.e. to one, but not to both.
    106.1: 'he met,' i.e. he answered.
    106.2: 'prisoners of war.' Cf. _dêdere_, 'to surrender.'
    106.3: Julius Caesar, like the later emperors, was deified after
    his death.
    106.4: 'sacrificial victims.'
    106.5: 'slaughtered.'
    106.6: 'pleasure.'
    106.7: #centiês# (sc. _centêna mîlia_) #sêstertium# = 'ten million
    sesterces,' or about four hundred thousand dollars. Cf. p. 88,
    n. 8.
    106.8: #mâgnificam . . . Antôniô#: 'under other circumstances
    truly splendid, but to Antony quite commonplace.'
    106.9: 'course.'
    106.10: 'vinegar.'
    106.11: 'pearls.'
    106.12: 'melts,' 'dissolves.'
    106.13: 'throne.'
    106.14: 'asp.'
    107.1: = _ostendit_.
    107.2: 'gentleness.'
    107.3: 'the sixth,' counting from March, with which, it is said,
    the Roman year originally began.
    107.4: #Compos . . . meôrum#: 'Now that I have gained my heart's
    desire,' which had been to avenge his uncle's death.
    107.5: 'Nay.'
    107.6: #commissum îrî# is fut. infin. pass. of _committô_, and =
    'was sure to be (lit. was going to be) handed over,' i.e. if he
    resigned.
    108.1: 'met.'
    108.2: 'retinue.'
    108.3: 'substitute.'
    108.4: 'wounds.'
    108.5: 'blushed.'
    108.6: 'artisan.'
    108.7: 'raven.'
    108.8: 'Hail!'
    108.9: = _sêstertiôrum_.
    108.10: = _dônum_.
    108.11: 'parrot.'
    108.12: 'cobbler.'
    108.13: 'outlay.'
    108.14: 'have come to naught.'
    108.15: 'added': lit., 'wove in.'
    108.16: #quantî . . . êmerat#: 'at a higher price than he had paid
    before.'
    108.17: 'offer.'
    109.1: 'paper.'
    109.2: 'scratched off,' 'wrote.'
    109.3: Examples of the historical infinitive, so called because it
    is especially common in historical writing. It is to be translated
    by an imperfect or perfect indicative.
    109.4: = _et . . . et_.
    109.5: 'purse.'
    109.6: 'francs.'
    109.7: 'steward.'
    109.8: 'whispered.'
    109.9: 'eels.'
    109.10: 'fish-pond.'
    109.11: 'food.'
    109.12: 'freed.'
    109.13: 'night-owl.'
    109.14: = _sêstertiôs_.
    110.1: 'executioner,' 'butcher.'
    110.2: 'size.'
    110.3: 'style.'
    110.4: 'furniture.'
    110.5: 'granddaughters.'
    110.6: 'made of brick.'
    110.7: 'finery.'
    111.1: #excubiâs . . . indîxit#: 'ordered watches to be set.'
    111.2: Often used like our 'to cut a long story short,' 'in
    short.'
    111.3: #barbâ . . . submissô#: 'letting his beard grow.'
    111.4: 'mirror' (of metal, generally bronze or silver).
    111.5: 'comedy.'
    111.6: 'conclusion.' Latin plays regularly close with an appeal of
    the actors to the spectators to grant them 'loud and prolonged
    applause.']


    [Illustration {SPQR}]




EXERCISES FOR TRANSLATION INTO LATIN

Words in round brackets are not to be translated; those in square
brackets indicate the Latin rendering. Note the 'Caution' on p. xxv. The
section numbers refer to the selections.


I.

#Apposition.#

1. Proca left his kingdom to his older son, Numitor. 2. Romulus and
Remus were the sons of Rhea Silvia, a priestess of Vesta. 3. The boys
were thrown into the river. 4. A shepherd of the king[1] carried them to
his hut. 5. Who was the grandfather of these boys? 6. Remus, when
grown,[2] was caught by (some) robbers.[3] 7. They thus accused him:
"You have trespassed on the king's lands." 8. A dispute arose between
the brothers. 9. Romulus said: "I shall give my name to the new city."
10. Which of them leaped over the wall?

    [Footnotes:
    1: Use adj.
    2: See p. 2, n. 19.
    3: H. 468 (415, I); M. 614; A 246; G 401; B 216.]


II.

#Agreement of adjectives, pronouns, and participles.#

1. Robbers and shepherds took refuge in[1] the city which Romulus had
founded. 2. These were the fathers of the Romans. 3. The envoys that the
king sent were nowhere kindly received. 4. The tribes to which he sent
did not seek an alliance. 5. Many of those who gathered had not seen
Rome. 6. The maidens whom they seized were the children of the Sabines,
who now undertook war. 7. (While) advancing to battle, the Romans
carried (their) shields on (their) left arms. 8. The Sabines killed
Hostilius (while he was) fighting very bravely. 9. The Romans fell
fighting bravely. 10. They founded a temple in honor[2] of Romulus and
worshiped him as a god.

    [Footnotes:
    1: _ad_ with acc.
    2: See p. 8, n. 1.]


III.

#Expressions of place; extent of time.#

1. Who succeeded Romulus? Numa Pompilius. 2. From what city did he come?
From Cures, [from] a city of the Sabines. 3. What did he do at Rome? 4.
He established many religious customs and had many useful laws passed.
5. A shield once slipped down from the sky. 6. (There) was a smith in
Rome[1] who made twelve shields of the same shape. 7. The Romans had
peace (for) forty-three years. 8. No temple was erected in honor of
Numa, but he was of more use to the state than Romulus.

    [Footnote:
    1: Locative case.]


IV.

#Ablative absolute; locatives of common nouns.#

1. At the death of Numa [Numa having died] the Romans elected a more
warlike king. 2. War[1] having broken[1] out between the Romans and the
Sabines, the dispute was settled by a contest between [of] the Curiatii
and the Horatii. 3. The young men took up arms and [arms having been
taken up][1] advanced to battle. 4. At a given[2] signal,[2] with drawn
swords, they rushed together. 5. As the two Romans fell [the two Romans
falling], the Alban army shouted for joy. 6. The sister of Horatius
began to weep when she saw her lover's cloak. 7. He drew his sword and
stabbed the girl who forgot [having forgotten] her brothers and her
country. 8. When Tullus learned of the treachery of the Alban general,
in anger[3] he ordered him to be put to death. 9. Then war was declared
against the Sabines.[4] 10. Very many young men were in military
service, a few were at home. 11. Tullus[5] Hostilius, who succeeded
Numa, liked war [war pleased] rather than peace.

    [Footnotes:
    1: See p. 1, n. 4.
    2: See p. 5, l. 12. [[in selection II]]
    3: Use participle.
    4: H. 429 (386); M. 534; A. 228; G. 347; B. 187, III.
    5: H. 426, 1 (385, I); M. 531; A. 227; G. 346; B. 187, II.]


V.

#Ablative of specification; dative with compounds.#

1. Ancus Marcius, the fourth king, was like Numa[1] in justice and
piety, but was more warlike. 2. During[2] his reign[2] a raid was made
on the Roman territory by the Latins. 3. When the king heard of this
[which having been learned], he declared war against them. 4. Having
defeated the Latins, he destroyed their towns and transferred the
citizens to Rome. 5. Romulus had built a wall around the city, but this
wall was larger. 6. Of these four kings of Rome, two were distinguished
in war, two in peace.

    [Footnotes:
    1: H. 434 (391, I); M. 536; A. 234; G. 359; B. 192, 1.
    2: Abl. abs.]


VI.

#Direct and indirect questions.#

1. Tarquin came from Etruria, a city of the Etruscans. 2. When Ancus
died,[2] Tarquin was made guardian of his children. 3. Thus he obtained
the throne. 4. (There) was at Rome a celebrated augur. 5. The king once
asked him whether he could cut a whetstone with a razor. Can[1] you cut
a whetstone with a razor? 7. You cannot[2] cut a whetstone with a razor,
can you? 8. The sons of Ancus asked the shepherds whether they could
commit a crime. 9. Can you commit a crime? 10. The shepherds entered[3]
the palace and[3] began to bawl out. 11. One of them killed the king
with an axe. 12. Does not this seem to you an atrocious crime?

    [Footnotes:
    1: H. 378, 2 (351, 1, N. 1); M. 698; A. 210, _a_; G. 454;
       B. 162, _c_.
    2: H. 378 (351, 1, N. 3); M. 701; A. 210, _c_; G. 456;
       B. 162, _b_.
    3: See p. 2, n. 8.]


VII.

#Ablative of source; ablative of quality.#

1. At the death of Tarquin, Servius Tullius succeeded to the throne. 2.
He was born of a woman[1] of rank, who, however, was a slave in
Tarquin's house. 3. On the advice of Tanaquil [Tanaquil advising] he was
brought up just as the children of the king. 4. He was a young man of
great bravery,[1] and became the king's son-in-law. 5. One of Tullius's
daughters was gentle, the other wild. 6. Tarquin's sons were of like
character. 7. The king was slain by order of his own son-in-law. 8.
Tullia was a woman of base character and did not love her father. 9. The
people asked Tullia what she had done.[2]

    [Footnotes:
    1: Abl. Why?
    2: See p. 3, n. 2.]


VIII.

#Temporal clauses with _cum_; ablative of price.#

1. The city of Gabii could not be captured by Tarquin. 2. When Sextus
had been chosen general, he sent a messenger to his father. 3. When he
learned of the silence[1] and act of his father, he killed the chief men
of the state. 4. When each of the young men praised his own wife, it was
decided to find out who was the best. 5. When Lucretia had summoned her
husband[1] and father,[1] she killed herself with a knife. 6. An old
woman once asked Tarquin whether he wished to buy some books at an
enormous price. 7. At first Tarquin ridiculed her, but, after she had
burned six books, he bought the remaining three at the same price.

    [Footnote:
    1: Abl. abs.]


IX.

#Causal clauses with _cum_; purpose clauses with _ut_.#

1. Since his brother had been killed, Brutus feared the same fate, for
he was a young man of great sagacity. 2. He set out for Delphi with
Tarquin's sons. 3. When they had consulted the oracle, they returned to
Rome. 4. The Romans chose Brutus and Collatinus, the son of the sister
of Tarquin the Elder, consuls. 5. As the sons of Brutus were traitors,
they were put to death. 6. In order to regain[1] his throne, Tarquin
undertook war. 7. Brutus, who had gone ahead with the cavalry to[2]
reconnoitre,[2] met the enemy. 8. Brutus and Aruns fell in the first
charge. 9. Since one consul had been slain, the other returned to the
city alone.

    [Footnotes:
    1: See p. 1, l. 3 and n. 5.
    2: Express in two ways; cf. l. 30, and #ageret#, l. 26.]


X.

#Causal clauses with _quod_.#

1. Mucius received permission to go over [of going over] to the enemy,
because (as he said) he wished to kill the king. 2. Because he did not
know which was[1] the king, he killed the clerk. 3. To punish the hand
which had committed the crime, he placed it on a lighted altar. 4. After
this he was called Scaevola.

    [Footnote:
    1: See p. 3, n. 2.]


XI.

#Dative of possessor; construction with _paenitet_.#

1. The Veientes harassed the Romans with repeated raids. 2. The Fabian
gens proposed [had in mind] to carry on the war at its own expense. 3.
The senate thanked the consul because he had provided for this war. 4.
When they arrived at the river Cremera, they established a fortified
post and repeatedly routed the enemy. 5. The Veientes soon repented of
the peace they had secured and renewed the war. 6. The Fabians roamed
about in order to lay waste the enemy's territory. 7. They were
entrapped in an ambush and all slain.


XII.

#Relative clauses of purpose.#

1. I intend to write about the crime of Appius Claudius, the Decemvir.
2. He fell in love with a beautiful girl, and, when he found that he
could not entice her with money, he claimed her as a slave [for
slavery]. 3. He sent one of his clients to the market place to carry[1]
her off by force. 4. The girl's friends sent a messenger to carry the
news[1] to her father Virginius, who was then away on military duty. 5.
Virginius immediately returned to Rome and sought the aid of the people.
6. When he saw that there was no aid anywhere, he seized a knife and
killed his daughter. 7. Appius then repented of his crime.

    [Footnote:
    1: See p. 5, n. 3.]


XIII.

#Complementary infinitive; genitive with _oblivîscor_; hortatory
subjunctive.#

1. The tribune of the plebs appointed a day for (the trial of) Manlius,
because with great severity he had banished his son to the country. 2.
When his son Titus heard of this design of the tribune, he hastened to
Rome and forced him to abandon the charge. 3. Such [this] filial
devotion reflected great credit on the young man, and his father
repented of his harshness. 4. Afterwards, when the Gauls were carrying
on war with the Romans, a Gaul of enormous size wanted to fight with the
bravest Roman. 5. "Let him come on," said Titus Manlius, who was now
tribune of the soldiers, "that I may show him which of us is the
braver." 6. Between the two lines they joined[1] in close[1] combat,[1]
and with a stroke or two of his Spanish sword he thrust through his
gigantic foe. 7. Having stripped a necklace from the Gaul, he was
afterwards called Torquatus. 8. The son of this same Torquatus, without
the consent of the consul, his father, met and conquered a Latin in a
single combat. 9. When he returned to camp, his father ordered him to be
put to death because he had disobeyed[2] his commander. 10. The young
man's companions did not forget the father's cruelty. 11. Cornelius Piso
was also a man of great sternness. 12. He once ordered a soldier to be
put to death on the charge of murdering a comrade. 13. The comrade had
not been murdered and soon appeared in camp. 14. When they returned to
Piso with great rejoicing, he angrily ordered both the comrades and the
centurion who had been placed in charge of the execution to be put to
death. 15. Another Manlius was guilty of [showed] like cruelty toward
his son. 16. The Macedonians sent ambassadors to complain[3] about his
son Silanus. 17. Manlius wanted to try the case himself, and this was
granted by the senate. 18. After he had heard both sides of the case, he
forbade his son to return to his home. 19. The next day[4] the young man
committed[5] suicide.[5]

    [Footnotes:
    1: See p. 11, l. 14.  [[in selection IV]]
    2: The reason is that of the father, not the writer.
    3: Cf. #conquestum#, l. 82, with #quî dêpôsceret#, XII, l. 7, and
       express in two ways.
    4: H. 486 (429); M. 630; A. 256; G. 393; B. 230.
    5: See XII, l. 30.]


XIV.

#Construction of _medius_, _summus_, etc.#

1. The consul sent Publius Decius to get possession of the summit of a
hill. 2. When the consul had escaped, he led his army in safety through
the midst of [middle] enemies. 3. In the Latin war he sacrificed himself
in order to save his army. 4. Let us never forget this brave man.


XV.

#Indirect quotation of simple sentences; ablative with _opus_.#

1. "The Samnites are our enemies," said Curius; "let us set out against
them." 2. Immediately he set out, and, having[1] conquered[1] the
Samnites,[1] he took a large amount of land and many captives [men]. 3.
He swore (that there) was[2] none [nothing] of the booty in his house.
4. Cicero says (that) the Samnites brought [to have brought] a great
weight of gold to Curius. 5. Curius scorned[1] their gold[1] (and) said
that he could not be bribed. 6. He told the senate that he was contented
with seven jugera of land. 7. He afterwards sold into slavery a young
man who refused to serve in the army [military service]. 8. The young
man saw that the tribunes could not help him [not to be able to be for
an aid to him]. 9. After he had destroyed the army of Pyrrhus, he
returned to Rome in triumph [triumphing]. 10. It is said that Pyrrhus
was slain by a woman of Argos.[3] 11. So the Romans[4] did not need the
aid[5] of Curius again.

    [Footnotes:
    1: Abl. abs.
    2: See p. 7, n. 16.
    3: Use adj.
    4: Dat. of poss.
    5: Cf. #cîve#, l. 22.]


XVI.

#_Nê_ with verbs of fearing; ablative with _ûtor_.#

1. It is said that Duilius was the first to conquer the Carthaginians in
a naval battle. 2. He used grappling[1] irons[1] to seize and hold the
enemy's ships. 3. He saw that with this useful contrivance the Romans
would have an easy victory [victory to be about to be easy to the
Romans]. 4. He now set[2] out boldly into the midst[3] of the enemy's
fleet, and captured many of their ships. 5. The Romans were pleased with
this victory. 6. The Carthaginians feared that the Romans would now be
supreme on land and sea. 7. Hannibal, the leader of the Carthaginians,
by a shrewd trick escaped punishment for losing his fleet.

    [Footnotes:
    1: Cf. #quô#, p. 36, l. 4 and n. 10.
    2: Use participle.
    3: See Ex. XIV, sentence 2.]


XVII.

#Gerundive with _esse_; ablative of separation; ablative with
comparatives.#

1. After the Carthaginians had been defeated by Regulus, Hanno came to
negotiate[1] [about] peace. 2. The Roman soldiers saw that[2] he had
come[2] treacherously and was not in earnest in his negotiations [did
not negotiate seriously]. 3. Hanno was afraid that[3] he would be
arrested and put in chains. 4. Regulus relieved him of his fear[4] and
told him that the Romans did not wish to retaliate. 5. In Africa,
Regulus[5] had[6] to fight not only with men, but also with an enormous
serpent. 6. As its scales could not be pierced by javelins, Regulus was
compelled to use the artillery. 7. In this way the monster was crushed.
8. When Regulus learned that the senate had extended his command to the
next year, he asked that his successor should be sent at once.[7] 9. He
said that he had lost his slave and farming implements and that his wife
and children had no means of support [he had nothing whence his wife and
children should be supported]. 10. The senate relieved him of this
anxiety. 11. After he had defeated the Carthaginians in many battles,
Regulus himself was defeated and captured. 12. It is said that he was
sent from Carthage to Rome to negotiate an exchange of [about
exchanging] prisoners. 13. When the senate ordered him to state his
opinion, he said that the Carthaginian captives ought not to be
returned. 14. He thought that they were better generals than the
Romans.[8] 15. As[9] he had given[9] his oath,[9] he returned to
Carthage and was put to death with terrible torture.

    [Footnotes:
    1: Several forms of expressing purpose have been used in the text.
       Express this in as many ways as you can.
    2: See p. 7, n. 16.
    3: See p. 38, n. 12.
    4: Abl. Why?
    5: H. 431 (388); M. 544; A. 232; G. 355; B. 189, 1.
    6: See p. 39, n. 11.
    7: #statim.#
    8: See #Âfrîs#, l. 10, and note.
    9: Abl. abs.]


XVIII.

#Ablative of time.#

1. Appius Claudius was no[1] better than the preceding generals, who did
not boast that they would sink the enemy's fleet (on) the first day[2]
of the war. 2. The chicken-keeper informed him that the chickens would
not [to be unwilling to] eat. 3. "Let[3] them drink then," said Appius,
and ordered them to be plunged into the sea. 4. That very [self] day he
was defeated, and many thousands of the Romans slain. 5. He afterwards
committed suicide, for he knew that he would be put to death by the
people. 6. Upon his sister, too, a heavy fine had[4] to be imposed.

    [Footnotes:
    1: See XVII, l. 10, and note.
    2: Cf. Ex. XIII, sent. 19.
    3: Cf. Ex. XIII, sent. 5.
    4: Cf. Ex. XVII, sent. 5.]


XIX.

#Purpose clauses with _quô_; ablative with _potior_; unreal conditions;
_quîn_ clauses; ablative with _dîgnus_.#

1. It is said that Hannibal, when a boy of nine years, took an oath of
undying hatred toward the Romans. 2. On the death of his father, he
stirred up war by capturing Saguntum [Saguntum captured]. 3. Fabius said
that he carried peace and war in his toga. 4. "Give which you please,"
replied the Carthaginians. 5. "I give war," said Fabius. ["War," said
Fabius, "I give."] 6. After three Roman consuls had been defeated by
Hannibal, Fabius was sent against him. 7. Changing[1] the policy[1] of
the war, he held his soldiers in camp, and did not come to an engagement
with the enemy. 8. When, on account of some trifling successes, his
soldiers had begun to have more confidence in their valor and fortune,
he blockaded Hannibal in a narrow pass. 9. Fabius thought that he could
not escape. 10. But Hannibal knew how[2] cautious Fabius was,[3] and got
out (of the trap) without any loss. 11. Minucius,[4] the master of
horse, did not like the policy of Fabius. 12. He made charges against
the dictator in order to obtain greater authority[5] himself. 13. When
he had joined battle, he had to be rescued from his peril by Fabius. 14.
Minucius now confessed that the policy of Fabius was better than his
own. 15. They say that some young men of rank betrayed Tarentum to
Hannibal. 16. In the middle of the night the gates were opened and the
young men entered, followed by Hannibal [Hannibal following] with his
army. 17. Fabius recaptured Tarentum the same[6] year[6] it was lost.
18. If he had not used cunning he would not have recaptured it. 19. When
an old man, Fabius, at the command of a lictor, dismounted from a horse
which he was riding out of respect for the rank of his son, then consul.
20. "If you were not consul," said he, "I should not dismount." 21. No
one doubts that Fabius was worthy of the name _Maximus_. 22. At that
time the Romans needed[7] a cautious general.

    [Footnotes:
    1: Abl. abs.
    2: #quam.#
    3: See p. 3, n. 2.
    4: Cf. l. 43.
    5: Cf. #Tarentô#, l. 58, and note.
    6: See l. 88, and Ex. XVIII, n. 4.
    7: See Ex. XV, sent. 11.]


XX.

#Subjunctive of result; dative with special verbs; partitive genitive.#

1. Varro was so rash that,[1] although he was opposed by his colleague,
he formed[1] his army in line and gave[1] the signal for battle. 2. In
the midst of the carnage a certain military tribune urged[2] Paulus to
take[2] his horse and flee.[2] 3. But Paulus said that he preferred to
perish with his soldiers. 4. When the Carthaginians heard of Hannibal's
victory, they sent messengers to congratulate him.[3] 5. Maharbal[4] did
not like[4] the advice of the others. 6. He said that Hannibal knew
(how) to conquer, but did not know (how) to make use of a victory. 7.
Hannibal permitted his army to enjoy the luxuries of Campania. 8. The
terror at Rome was so great that they did not delay an instant. 9. No
one doubted that[5] Hannibal would come[5] with his victorious army. 10.
If he had advanced at once to Rome, the city would have been captured.
11. Though Varro survived the battle,[6] he thought that he was not
worthy of office[7] again. 12. As the soldiers did not have enough
weapons,[8] they took down from the temples the ancient spoils of the
enemy. 13. One of the ambassadors,[9] whom Hannibal had sent to Rome to
offer an opportunity of ransoming the captives, did not return. 14. The
senate decided that he must be led back to Hannibal in chains [bound].
15. Rome has no need of citizens who can be captured when armed.

    [Footnotes:
    1: See p. 10, n. 9.
    2: Cf. lines 26 and 27.
    3: H. 426, 2 (385, II); M. 531; A. 227; G. 346; B. 187, II, _a_.
    4: Cf. Ex. XIX, sent. 11.
    5: See p. 39, n. 4.
    6: See p. 2, n. 7.
    7: See Ex. XIX, sent. 21.
    8: H. 440, 5 (397); M. 564; A. 216; G. 367; B. 201.
    9: Cf. with n. 7 ûnus ex êius praefectîs, l. 27.]


XXI.

#Concessive clauses with _cum_; genitive of characteristic; causal
relative clauses; gerundive with _ad_; accusative of extent.#

1. Scipio would have been slain in the battle at the river Ticinus, if
his son Publius had not rescued him. 2. When Publius Scipio was not yet
twenty years old, he thought that he was old enough [had enough of
years] to be a candidate for[1] the aedileship. 3. After the battle of
Cannae, some young men of rank began to form plans for abandoning Italy.
4. Scipio hastened to their meeting-place, and, although[2] he was
alone, he forced them to give[3] up their conspiracy.[3] 5. After the
Romans had suffered two defeats in Spain, Scipio was chosen proconsul
and sent thither. 6. Here he prosecuted the war with such wisdom and
bravery that he earned the approval of all. 7. Do you not think that he
was worthy of the honor? 8. He gained possession of a large amount of
money and arms, but let the Spanish captives go without ransom. 9. He
did not doubt that in this way he would secure for the Romans the favor
of the Spanish [conciliate the Spanish to the Romans]. 10. Among the
captive Africans he found a boy of remarkable beauty,[4] who said that
his grandfather was the king of Numidia, and that he had crossed over
into Spain with his uncle Masinissa to carry on war with the Romans. 11.
Scipio freed the boy, and thus won the favor of the Numidian king. 12.
When the Spaniards wanted to call Scipio king, he asked them to refrain
from that title. 13. After Hannibal had been driven from Spain, Scipio,
who had[5] long been planning to transfer the war to Africa, sent
Laelius, whose[6] friendship he did not mistrust, to win over some of
the African chiefs. 14. Afterwards he crossed over to Africa himself,
and it is said that he met Hannibal [to him a meeting with Hannibal to
have been] at the court of Syphax. 15. It happened that many of those
chiefs were eager to form an alliance with Scipio. 16. His plan,
therefore, was easily carried out. 17. Although the young men of Sicily
shrank from so great a war themselves, still they were willing to
furnish horses and arms. 18. Although they were wealthy, they were not
(men) of great bravery. 19. In Africa the Romans fought with such
determination that in a short time the Carthaginians recalled Hannibal
from Italy to defend his country. 20. A battle was fought [it was
fought] at Zama, a town five days' march from Carthage. 21. The
Carthaginians were defeated, and forced to send ambassadors to sue for
peace. 22. As peace was now secured, Scipio returned to Italy. 23. On[7]
his arrival in Rome a vast multitude poured forth to meet him. 24.
Scipio was not only the most illustrious general of his age, but he was
also a man distinguished for [of distinguished] piety.[8] 25. The old
writers say that he used to visit [resort to] the capitol every day, to
consult with Jupiter about the public interests. 26. At Ephesus he[9]
afterwards had a conversation with Hannibal. 27. It is reported that
Hannibal acknowledged that Scipio was the greatest of all commanders.
28. When the senate seemed on the point[10] of transferring the conduct
of the war against Antiochus from Lucius Scipio to Laelius, because
(as was thought) the former[11] had too little courage and too little
wisdom for such a war, Africanus promised to be himself his brother's
lieutenant. 29. Scipio could endure no dishonor to his family. 30. After
Antiochus had been defeated, when the senate demanded from Lucius Scipio
an accounting of the spoils, Africanus prevented it. 31. He said that he
had been of [for] so great aid to his country that his integrity ought
not to be doubted. 32. It happened that Africanus himself was afterwards
summoned for trial by the tribunes on the very day on which the battle
of Zama had been fought.[12] 33. When ordered to plead his cause, he
mounted the rostrum and said: "Let us offer thanks to Jupiter, by whose
aid we obtained[13] so great a victory." 34. As the whole assembly
followed him he was relieved from the insults of the tribunes. 35. Soon
afterward Scipio retired to the country and never returned to Rome.

    [Footnotes:
    1: Use #ad# with gerundive or gerund.
    2: H. 598 (515, III); M. 863; A. 326; G. 587; B. 309, 3.
    3: Cf. _inceptô dêsisterent_, l. 14.
    4: Cf. lines 51 and 64.
    5: See p. 56, n. 6.
    6: See p. 55, n. 8.
    7: See XIII, l. 59.
    8: _religiô._
    9: Use dat. of poss. with #esse#.
    10: Use future participle.
    11: _ille._
    12: See sent. 20, and p. 56, n. 4.
    13: See p. 55, n. 8.]


XXII.

#Future conditions.#

1. Cornelia, the mother of the Gracchi, was the daughter of Scipio
Africanus. 2. She had been educated with such care herself that she was
able to train her sons wisely. 3. She told a Campanian woman, who was a
guest at her house, that she[1] too had some very beautiful jewels. 4.
Everybody knows that Cornelia's jewels were her sons. 5. She has justly
been considered one of the wisest women of that age. 6. Though her sons
were most worthy of their excellent mother, yet the nobles thought that
they were disturbing the republic. 7. Both of the Gracchi thought more
of [preferred] their country's safety than [to] their own lives. 8.
Tiberius tried to protect the common people, but the senate thought that
he was preparing for himself a way to regal power. 9. So Nasica urged[2]
all loyal citizens to follow him. 10. When Gracchus saw that the
senators were rushing upon him he fled, but was killed by a broken piece
of a bench. 11. Caius had the same[3] love for the common people as[3]
his brother. 12. All loyal citizens said that they opposed his plans
because they wanted the republic to be safe. 13. "If the law about
distributing grain to the common people is[4] passed," said Piso,
"I shall come with the others to get the grain." 14. Finally this was
decreed by the senate: "Let the consul see that the republic receive no
harm." 15. Some say that Gracchus armed his household and took
possession of the Aventine. 16. When he was put to flight he ordered his
slave to kill him that he might not be arrested. 17. Such was the fate
of the Gracchi, the jewels of Cornelia, the best sons of the Roman
republic.

    [Footnotes:
    1: Use dat. of poss.
    2: Cf. Ex. XX, sent. 2, and note.
    3: Cf. #îdem quî#, l. 31.
    4: See XVII, l. 10, and note.]


XXIII.

#Substantive clauses of purpose; latter supine.#

1. When Marius was in Spain with Scipio, some one asked this (question)
of Scipio. 2. If anything happens[1] to you, what equally great
commander will the republic have? 3. Scipio replied that Marius would be
a great commander. 4. In the war against Jugurtha it is said that he
made charges against Metellus so that he might be appointed commander
himself. 5. If you make me consul, I will shortly bring Jugurtha under
the power of the Romans. 6. Thus he persuaded the people to make[2] him
consul. 7. After Jugurtha had been conquered, he carried on war with the
Cimbri and Teutones. 8. His soldiers entreated Marius to lead them
against the enemy. 9. The battle was fought right at the foot of the
Alps. 10. As the Romans[3] had no water, Marius told his soldiers that,
if they conquered[4] the enemy, they would have abundance of water. 11.
It is said that after the battle the soldiers drank no less blood than
water, because the river was filled with the bodies of the slain. 12.
The Cimbri, having now entered Italy, sent messengers to Marius to ask
him to give them some land. 13. Marius threatened them[5] with the same
fate[5] which had befallen their brothers. 14. On the next day a battle
was fought, and slaughter terrible to witness[6] followed. 15. When the
women saw that they were defeated they strangled their babes and killed
themselves. 16. Marius envied the new consul, Sulla, because the war
against Mithridates had been assigned him. 17. When Sulla heard what
Marius had done, he returned to Rome with his army and drove him into
exile. 18. While Marius was hiding in a swamp, he was caught and thrown
into prison. 19. He asked the slave, who was sent to kill him, whether
he dared kill the great consul. 20. After Sulla had set out for Asia,
Marius, who was a few days' journey from the city, returned and renewed
the civil war. 21. When he had put to death the best men of the state,
he gave over their homes to the rabble for plunder. 22. His death
afforded the Romans[7] more joy than his victory at Aquae Sextiae.

    [Footnotes:
    1: See p. 40, n. 1.
    2: Cf. #ut trâderet#, l. 21.
    3: Dat. Why?
    4: Cf. #sî fêcissent#, etc., l. 11.
    5: Observe carefully the construction in lines 57 and 58.
    6: Cf. #dictû#, l. 124, and p. 19, n. 15.
    7: #Dative.#]


XXIV.

#Relative clause of characteristic.#

1. A woman told Sulla (when he was) a child that he would be a blessing
to his country. 2. Was this the same woman who sold the Sibylline books
to King Tarquin? 3. Marius was vexed because Sulla had been chosen
quaestor. 4. Although Sulla had been dissolute, his military ability was
soon displayed. 5. He conquered Mithridates, the king of Pontus, and
would have completely subdued him had he not been recalled to Italy. 6.
When he had returned, with the greatest cruelty he punished with death
all who had supported Marius. 7. There was one young man who ventured to
advise him to spare some of his fellow-citizens. 8. If he had killed
all, there would have been none to govern [whom he should govern]. 9. He
wanted to kill not only his enemies, but also all who had money. 10.
When he at last laid down the dictatorship, the people were so crushed
that they did not dare to complain. 11. Sulla was fond of literary men
and was well versed in Greek literature. 12. He once gave a reward to a
wretched poet who had dedicated a poem to him, on condition that he
should write nothing thereafter.


XXV.

#Genitive with adjectives.#

1. Lucullus was distinguished both in war and in peace. 2. It is stated
by certain writers that he spent all of his early life in law practice
and was untrained in the art[1] of war. 3. But in the war with
Mithridates he surpassed even[2] experts in this art.[1] 4. All say that
he was exceedingly fond of money. 5. And this is the more surprising for
the reason that he had been educated in Greek philosophy. 6. He was not
the only one of the Romans to[3] squander his money in building villas.
7. He used to dine with the greatest luxury even when he was alone. 8.
Though fond of banquets, he was no less fond of books, and had a great
library, which was always open to the public.

    [Footnotes:
    1: H. 451, 1 (399, I, 2); M. 573; A. 218, _a_; G. 374; B. 204, 1.
    2: Cf. #mare ipsum#, l. 25.
    3: See p. 76, n. 11.]




ABBREVIATIONS


  abl. = ablative.
  abs. = absolute.
  acc. = accusative.
  act. = active.
  adj. = adjective.
  adv. = adverb.
  cf. = compare.
  comp. = comparative.
  conj. = conjunction.
  dat. = dative.
  def. = defective.
  dem. = demonstrative.
  desid. = desiderative.
  dim. = diminutive.
  disc. = discourse.
  e.g. = for example.
  encl. = enclitic.
  esp. = especially.
  f. = feminine, following.
  freq. = frequentative.
  gen. = genitive.
  i.e. = that is.
  imperf. = imperfect.
  impers. = impersonal.
  indef. = indefinite.
  indir. = indirect.
  insep. = inseparable.
  interj. = interjection.
  interr. = interrogative.
  intrans. = intransitive.
  l. = line.
  m. = masculine.
  n. = neuter, note.
  nom. = nominative.
  num. = numeral.
  obj. = objective.
  orig. = originally.
  p. = page.
  part. = participle, partitive.
  pass. = passive.
  perf. = perfect.
  pers. = personal.
  pl. = plural.
  poss. = possessive.
  prep. = preposition.
  pres. = present.
  pron. = pronoun, pronominal.
  rel. = relative.
  sc. = supply.
  sup. = superlative.
  trans. = transitive.

The star prefixed to certain verbs, e.g. #flîgô# and #speciô#, indicates
that the verb was obsolete, i.e. not in ordinary use. Compound verbs are
defined under the simple verbs from which they are derived. To this
practice there are, however, two exceptions: (1) When neither the simple
verb nor any other compound formed from it occurs in the text, and
(2) in the case of certain verbs like #sûmô# and #surgô#, which, though
themselves compounds, came to be regarded virtually as simple verbs and
served as the base of further compounds.

The student will therefore save time and labor if he accustoms himself
when reading to analyze compound verbs before consulting the Vocabulary.
This analysis will often make plain the meaning of the compound, and
render it unnecessary to seek the aid of the Vocabulary at all.




VOCABULARY


#A.#, abbreviation of the Roman praenomen _Aulus_.

#â, ab, abs#, prep. with abl.; (1) of place, _from, away from, out of_;
(2) of time, _from, since, after_; (3) of agency, _by_; (4) of
separation, source, cause, _from, through, because of_; in composition,
_off, away_.

#abaliênô, âre, âvî, âtus# [#ab# + #aliênus#], _to remove, alienate,
estrange_.

#abdicô#, see #dicô#.

#abditus# [orig. part. of #abdô#], adj., _hidden, concealed_.

#abdô#, see #dô#.

#abdûcô#, see #dûcô#.

#abeô#, see (1) #eô#.

#abiciô#, see #iaciô#.

#abluô, ere, î, ûtus# [#ab# + #luô#, _to wash_], _to wash, cleanse,
purify_.

#abnuô#, see #*nuô#.

#abripiô#, see #rapiô#.

#abrogô#, see #rogô#.

#abs#, see #â#.

#abscêdô#, see #cêdô#.

#abscindô#, see #scindô#.

#absêns, entis# [orig. part. of #absum#], adj., _absent, away_.

#absistô#, see #sistô#.

#absolvô#, see #solvô#.

#absorbeô, êre, uî, absorptus# [#ab# + #sorbeô#, _to swallow_], _to
swallow_.

#abstinentia, ae# [#abstineô#], f., _abstinence, self-restraint,
integrity_.

#abstineô#, see #teneô#.

#abstrahô#, see #trahô#.

#absum#, see #sum#.

#absûmô#, see #sûmô#.

#ac#, see #atque#.

#Acca, ae#, f., praenomen of Acca Larentia, foster-mother of Romulus and
Remus.

#accêdô#, see #cêdô#.

#accendô#, see #candeô#.

#accidô#, see #cadô#.

#accingô#, see #cingô#.

#acciô, îre, îvî, îtus# [#ad# + #cieô#, _to set in motion_], _to summon,
invite_.

#accipiô#, see #capiô#.

#acclâmô#, see #clâmô#.

#accommodô, âre, âvî, âtus# [#ad# + #commodus#], _to fit to, adjust,
regulate_.

#accumbô#, see #*cumbô#.

#accurrô#, see #currô#.

#accûsâtiô, ônis# [#accûsô#], f., _accusation, prosecution_.

#accûsâtor, ôris# [#accûsô#], m., _accuser, prosecutor_.

#accûsô, âre, âvî, âtus# [#ad# + #causa#], _to call to trial, accuse,
blame_.

#âcer, âcris, âcre#, comp. #âcrior#, sup. #âcerrimus#, adj., _sharp,
bitter, piercing_; _keen, eager, vigorous, fierce_.

#acerbê# [#acerbus#, _bitter_], adv., _bitterly, cruelly, severely_.

#acerbitâs, âtis# [#acerbus#, _bitter_], f., _harshness, severity,
unkindness_.

#acêtum, î# [cf. #âcer#], n., _vinegar_.

#aciês, êî# [cf. #âcer#], f., _a sharp point_ of a sword or dagger; _a
battle line_ (conceived of as a sword point); _battle_.

#âcriter#, comp. #âcrius#, sup. #âcerrimê# [#âcer#], adv., _sharply,
spiritedly, fiercely, grievously_.

#Actiacus#, adj., _of_ or _at Actium_.

#Actium, î#, n., a promontory and town in Epirus, near which, in 31
B.C., Octavianus defeated Antony and Cleopatra in a naval battle.

#ad#, prep. with accus.; (1) of place, _to, towards, to the house of,
at, near_; (2) of time, _up to, towards, until, at_; (3) of purpose,
_to, in order to, for, for the sake of_; (4) of other relations,
_according to, at_. In composition, it = _to, towards_, and also denotes
_addition_ and _intensity_.

#adamô, âre, âvî, âtus# [#ad# + #amô#, _to love_], _to love earnestly_.

#addîcô#, see #dîcô#.

#addô#, see #dô#.

#addûcô#, see #dûcô#.

(1) #adeô#, see (1) #eô#.

(2) #adeô# [#ad# + (2) #eô#], adv., _to this point, so very, so, to such
a degree, actually_; #atque adeô#, _and in fact_.

#adequitô#, see #equitô#.

#adfectô, âre, âvî, âtus# [#ad# + #faciô#], _to strive after,
aspire to_.

#adferô#, see #ferô#.

#adficiô#, see #faciô#.

#adfînis, is# [#ad# + #fînis#], m., _a relative_ (by marriage).

#adfîrmô#, see #fîrmô#.

#adflâtus, ûs# [#adflô#], m., _a blast, breath; effluvia, exhalation_.

#adflîctus# [orig. part. of #adflîgô#], adj., _shattered, weakened,
wretched_.

#adflîgô#, see #*flîgô#.

#adflô#, see #flô#.

#adhibeô#, see #habeô#.

#adhortâtiô, ônis# [#adhortor#, _to encourage_], f., _encouragement,
exhortation_.

#adiciô#, see #iaciô#.

#adigô#, see #agô#.

#adipîscor, î, adeptus sum# [#ad# + #apîscor#, _to reach_], _to gain by
effort, get, acquire_.

#aditus, ûs# [(1) #adeô#], m., _approach, access_.

#adiûmentum# [orig. #adiuvâmentum#, from #adiuvô#], n., _help, aid,
service_.

#adiungô#, see #iungô#.

#adiuvô, âre, iûvî, iûtus# [#ad# + #iuvô#, _to help_], _to aid, help_.

#adliciô#, see #*laciô#.

#adligô#, see #ligô#.

#adloquor#, see #loquor#.

#administrô, âre, âvî, âtus# [#ad# + #ministrô#, _to manage_], _to
manage, direct, govern, regulate_.

#admîrâbilis, e# [#admîror#], adj., _admirable, wonderful_.

#admîrandus# [#admîror#], adj., _marvelous, wonderful, strange_.

#admîrâtiô, ônis# [#admîror#], f., _wonder, admiration_; _surprise_.

#admîrâtor, ôris# [#admîror#], m., _admirer_.

#admîror, ârî, âtus sum# [#ad# + #mîror#, _to marvel at_], _to marvel
at, admire_.

#admittô#, see #mittô#.

#admodum# [#ad# + #modus#], adv., _up to the full limit, very,
exceedingly_.

#admoneô#, see #moneô#.

#admoveô#, see #moveô#.

#adnuô#, see #*nuô#.

#adolêscô, ere, olêvî, adultus# [#ad# + #olêscô#, _to grow_], _to grow
up, become mature, reach manhood_.

#adoperiô#, see #pariô#.

#adoptô#, see #optô#.

#adôrnô#, see #ôrnô#.

#adôrô#, see #ôrô#.

#adquîrô#, see #quaerô#.

#adripiô#, see #rapiô#.

#adscrîbô#, see #scrîbô#.

#adsentâtiô, ônis# [#adsentor#, _to agree with, to flatter_], f.,
_flattery_.

#adsequor#, see #sequor#.

#adsideô#, see #sedeô#.

#adsîdô#, see #sîdô#.

#adsiduus# [#adsideô#], adj., _incessant, repeated, continued_.

#adsîgnô#, see #sîgnô#.

#adspiciô#, see #*speciô#.

#adsuêscô#, see #suêscô#.

#adsum#, see #sum#.

#adsûmô#, see #sûmô#.

#adsurgô#, see #surgô#.

#adulêscêns, entis# [#adolêscô#], m. and f., _a young man_ or _woman_
(usually applied to persons between the ages of fifteen and thirty).

#adulêscentia, ae# [#adulêscêns#], f., _youth_.

#adulêscentulus, î# [dim. of #adulêscêns#], m., _a very young man,
stripling_.

#adûlor, ârî, âtus sum#, _to flatter_.

#adultus# [orig. part. of #adolêscô#], adj., _grown up, mature, adult_.

#advehô#, see #vehô#.

#adveniô#, see #veniô#.

#adventô, âre, âvî#, -- [freq. of #adveniô#], _to advance, approach_.

#adventus, ûs# [#adveniô#], m., _coming, approach, arrival_.

#adversârius, î# [#adversor#], m., _opponent, enemy_.

#adversor, ârî, âtus sum# [#adversus#], _to oppose, withstand, resist_.

#adversus# [#ad# + #vertô#], adj., _turned towards, facing, in front_;
_opposed, adverse, unfavorable_. As noun, #adversum, î#, n.,
_misfortune, calamity_.

#adversus# and #adversum#, prep. with acc., _in opposition to, against,
towards_.

#advocâtiô, ônis# [#advocô#], f., _advocacy, legal assistance_; #in
advocâtiônem venîre#, _to come to one's aid in court_.

#advocâtus, î# [#advocô#], m., _adviser, advocate_.

#advocô#, see #vocô#.

#aedês#, see #aedis#.

#aedificium, î# [#aedificô#], n., _a building_.

#aedificô, âre, âvî, âtus# [#aedis# + #faciô#], _to build_.

#aedîlis, is# [#aedis#], m., _aedile, commissioner of public works_, the
name of certain Roman magistrates, four in number, charged with the care
of the streets and public buildings, the regulation of the markets, and
the duty of distributing the corn which the state furnished to the poor.
They took care, also, of the records of the senate and other documents,
and superintended the performance of certain public games.

#aedîlitâs, âtis# [#aedîlis#], f., _aedileship_.

#aedis# or #aedês, is#, f., in sing., _temple_; in pl., _house,
dwelling_.

#aedituus, î# [#aedis# + #tueor#], m., _keeper of a temple, sexton_.

#aeger, aegra, aegrum#, adj., _sick, ill, feeble_.

#aegrê# [#aeger#], adv., _painfully, with difficulty, scarcely_; #aegrê
ferre#, _to be vexed at, take amiss_.

#aegritûdô, inis# [#aeger#], f., _sickness_; _grief, vexation,
mortification_.

#aegrôtô, âre, âvî#, -- [#aeger#], _to be ill_ or _feeble, lie sick_.

#Aegyptus, î#, m., _Egypt_.

#Aemilius, î#, m., the name of a Roman gens. See #Paulus#.

#aemulâtiô, ônis# [#aemulor#, _to rival_], f., _rivalry, competition_.

#aequâlis, e# [#aequus#], adj., _equal, like_ (esp. in age). As noun,
m., _comrade, companion_.

#aequê# [#aequus#], adv., _equally_.

#aequitâs, âtis# [#aequus#], f., _evenness, fairness, justice_.

#aequô, âre, âvî, âtus# [#aequus#], _to make even, place on an
equality_.

#aequus#, adj., _even, level_; _fair, just_; #aequô animô#, _patiently_.

#aerârium, î# [#aes#], n., _state treasury_; _public money_.

#aes, aeris#, n., _copper, bronze_; _money_ (first coined of bronze);
#aes aliênum#, _debt_.

#aestâs, âtis#, f., _summer_.

#aestîvus# [#aestâs#], adj., _of summer, summer_.

#aetâs, âtis#, f., _time of life, life, age, youth, old age_; _period,
time_.

#aeternum# [acc. sing. neut. of #aeternus#, _eternal_], adv.,
_eternally, forever_.

#Âfer, Âfrî#, m., _an African_, esp. an inhabitant of Carthage.

#Âfrica, ae#, f., _Africa_, esp. that part of it which lay near
Carthage.

#Âfricânus#, adj., _African_. As noun, #Âfricânus, î#, m., the cognomen
bestowed on Publius Cornelius Scipio, conqueror of Hannibal. See
#Scîpiô#.

#agedum#, an interj., used with the imperative or hortatory subjunctive,
_come on! come! quick!_

#agellus, î# [dim. of #ager#], m., _a little field, small estate_.

#ager, agrî#, m., _field, farm, estate_; _territory, land, district_;
_the country_.

#agger, eris# [#ad# + #gerô#], m., _mass_ (esp. of earth and brushwood),
_mound, rampart_.

#aggredior#, see #gradior#.

#agitô, âre, âvî, âtus# [freq. of #agô#], _drive violently hither and
thither_; _discuss, consider, meditate_.

  #con--côgitô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to think, reflect, consider_;
  _plan_.

  #ex# + #con--excôgitô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to think out, devise_.

#âgmen, inis# [#agô#], n., _an army_ (on the march), _marching column_;
_troop, array_.

#âgnôscô#, see #nôscô#.

#agô, agere, êgî, âctus#, _to set in motion, drive, lead_; _act, do,
perform_; _treat, deal, arrange_; _spend, pass_ (of time); #âctum est
dê#, _it was all up with_; #augurium agere#, _to perform the augural
ceremonies_; #cônsulem agere#, _to act the consul_, #dêlêctum agere#,
_to hold a levy_; #grâtiâs agere#, _to feel thankful_; #triumphum
agere#, _to celebrate a triumph_.

  #ad--adigô, ere, êgî, âctus#, _drive, urge, compel, constrain_.

  #con--côgô, ere, coêgî, coâctus#, _drive together, collect_;
  _compel, force_.

  #dê--dêgô, ere, dêgî, ----#, _pass, spend_ (of time).

  #ex--exigô, ere, êgî, âctus#, _to drive out_; _finish_; _pass,
  spend_.

  #per--peragô, ere, êgî, âctus#, _to finish, accomplish, play_
  (a part); _set forth, relate, describe_.

  #re--redigô, ere, êgî, âctus#, _to drive back, force, reduce,
  bring_.

  #sub--subigô, ere, êgî, âctus#, _to drive under, conquer, subdue_.

  #trâns--trânsigô, ere, êgî, âctus#, _to finish, settle, perform_.

#agrestis, e# [#ager#], adj., _of the fields_; _rustic_; _countrified,
rude, uncouth_.

#âiô, ais, ait, âiunt# [def. verb], _to say_.

#alacer, cris, cre#, adj., _lively, nimble, quick_; often = an adv.,
_eagerly_.

#alacritâs, âtis# [#alacer#], f., _liveliness, eagerness, spirit_.

#Alba# or #Alba Longa# (sc. #urbs#), f., an ancient town of the Latins.

#Albânus#, adj., _pertaining to Alba, Alban_. As noun, #Albânus, î#, m.,
_an inhabitant of Alba_.

#âlea, ae#, f., _game of dice_; _die_.

#Alexander, drî#, m., _Alexander the Great_, king of Macedonia from 336
to 323 B.C., and conqueror of Persia.

#Alexandrêa, ae#, f., _Alexandria_, a city in Egypt, at the mouth of the
Nile, founded by Alexander the Great.

#aliâs# [#alius#], adv., _at another time, under other circumstances_.

#alibî# [#alius# + #ibi#], adv., _elsewhere, in other places_.

#aliênus# [#alius#], adj., _belonging to another, another's_; #aes
aliênum#, _debt_.

#alimentum, î# [#alô#], n., _nourishment_; in plur., _food, provisions_.

#aliôquî#, adv., _in other respects, otherwise_.

#aliquamdiû# [#aliquis# + #diû#], adv., _for a while, for some time_.

#aliquandô# [#aliquis#], adv., _at some time or other, once, on a
certain occasion_; _at length, at last_.

#aliquantus#, adj., _some, considerable_. As noun, #aliquantum, î#, n.,
_a little, something_.

#aliquî, aliqua, aliquod# [#alius# + #quî#], indef. pron. adj., _some
one or other, some, any_.

#aliquis, qua, quid# [#alius# + #quis#], indef. pron., _some one,
something_; _any one, anything_; _some, any_. As noun, #aliquid#, n.,
_something, anything_.

#aliquot# [#alius# + #quot#], indef. indecl. adj., _some, several_.

#aliquotiêns# [#aliquot#], adv., _several times_.

#aliter# [#alius#], adv., _otherwise, differently_.

#alius, a, ud# (gen. #alîus#, dat. #aliî#), pron. adj., _another, other,
different_; #alius . . . alius#, _one . . . one, one . . . another_;
#aliî . . . aliî#, _some . . . others_.

#alô, ere, uî, tus#, _to feed, nourish, support, keep_.

#Alpês, ium#, f., _the Alps_.

#altâria, ium#, pl. n., _an altar_.

#alter, altera, alterum# (gen. #alterîus#, dat. #alterî#), pron. adj.,
_one of two, the other, the second_; #alter . . . alter#, _the one . . .
the other_.

#altercor, ârî, âtus sum# [#alter#], _to dispute, wrangle_.

#alteruter, utra, utrum# (gen. #alterutrîus#, dat. #alterutrî#), pron.
adj., _one or the other of two, one_ (only) _of two_.

#altus# [#alô#], adj., _high, lofty_; _deep_. As noun, #altum, î#, n.,
_the deep sea, the deep_; sup. #altissimum, î#, n., _top_.

#alveus, î#, m., _a basket, trough_.

#am, amb, ambi#, insep. prefix (seen in #amputô#), _around, on both
sides_.

#amâns, antis# [part. of #amô#, _to love_], adj., _loving, fond_; with
gen., _fond of, devoted to_.

#ambitiô, ônis# [#ambiô#, _to go around_], f., _canvassing for public
office, ambition_.

#ambô, ae, ô#, adj., _both_.

#ambulâtiô, ônis# [#ambulô#], f., _a walk, promenade_.

#ambulô, âre, âvî, --#, _to walk, stroll_.

  #dê--deambulô, âre, --, --#, _to walk, stroll, promenade_.

  #in--inambulô, âre, --, --#, _to walk up and down, stroll_.

#amîcitia, ae# [#amîcus#], f., _friendship_.

#amictus# [orig. part. of #amiciô#, _to wrap about_], adj., _clothed in,
clad in_.

#amîcus# [#amô#, _to love_], adj., _friendly_.

#amîcus, î# [#amô#, _to love_], m., _a friend_.

#âmittô#, see #mittô#.

#amnis, is#, m., _river, torrent, stream_.

#amor, ôris# [#amô#, _to love_], m., _love, passion_.

#âmoveô#, see #moveô#.

#amphora, ae#, f., _a two-handled jar_. It held about six gallons.

#amplector, î, amplexus sum#, _to twine around, embrace_.

#ampliô, âre, âvî, âtus# [#amplus#], _to enlarge, widen, extend_.

#amplius# [comp. of #amplus#], indecl. adj. and adv., _further, more,
besides_.

#amplus#, adj., _great, large_; _noble, distinguished_.

#amputô#, see #putô#.

#Amûlius, î#, m., _Amûlius_, son of Proca, a legendary king of Alba
Longa.

#anceps, ancipitis# [#ambi# + #caput#], adj., _two-headed_; _doubtful,
hazardous_.

#ancîle, is#, n., a small oval shield, shaped like the faces of a
guitar.

#ancilla, ae#, f., _a maid-servant, maid_.

#Ancus, î#, m., the praenomen of Ancus Marcius, the fourth king of Rome.

#angô, ere, --, --#, _squeeze, choke_; _vex, annoy_.

#angor, ôris# [#angô#], m., _vexation, sorrow, anguish_.

#anguis, is# [#angô#], m. and f., _a snake_.

#angulus, î# [#angô#], m., _corner, nook_.

#angustiae, ârum# [#angustus#], f., _narrowness, narrow place, narrow
pass_.

#angustus# [#angô#], adj., _narrow_.

#anima, ae#, f., _air, breath, soul, life_.

#animadvertô, ere, vertî, versus# [#animus# + #advertô#], _to turn the
mind to, perceive, notice_; #in aliquem animadvertere#, _to punish_.

#animal, âlis# [#anima#], n., _a living thing, an animal_.

#animus, î#, m., _mind, soul, reason_; _courage, spirit_; _temper,
disposition_; in plur., _affections, allegiance_.

#Aniô, Aniênis#, m., a tributary of the Tiber.

#annâlis, is# [#annus#], adj., _yearly, annual_. As noun, #Annâlês#
(sc. _librî_), _year-books, records_; strictly brief abstracts of
contemporary events kept in early days by the Pontifex Maximus, and
exposed to view on a white-washed plank set up at his official
residence. #Annâlês# is a frequent title of Latin historical works.

#annôna, ae# [#annus#], f., _the year's crop_, esp. of grain; _corn
supply_.

#annus, î#, m., _a year_.

#ante# (1) adv.; of space, _before, in front of_; of time, _before,
previously, ago_; (2) prep. with acc., both of space and time, _in front
of, before_.

#anteâ# [#ante#], adv., _before, formerly_.

#antecêdô#, see #cêdô#.

#anteeô#, see (1) #eô#.

#antequam# or #ante . . . quam#, conj., _before, until_.

#Antiochus, î#, m., _Antiochus_.

  1. Antiochus the Great, king of Syria 223-187 B.C., conquered by
  Scipio Asiaticus in 190.

  2. A philosopher, born at Ascalon in Palestine, whose lectures
  Cicero heard at Athens in 79 B.C.

#antîquus#, adj., _ancient_.

#Antônius, î#, m., a Roman gentile name.

  1. _M. Antônius_, a friend of Julius Caesar and a member of the
  second triumvirate. He was defeated by Octavianus off Actium in 31
  B.C., and killed himself the following year.

  2. _C. Antônius Hybrida_, uncle of the triumvir, and consul with
  Cicero, B.C. 63.

#ânulus, î# [dim. of #ânus#, _a circle_], m., _a finger ring_.

#anus, ûs#, f., _an old woman_.

#anxius# [#angô#], adj., _anxious, troubled_.

#aper, aprî#, m., _a wild boar_.

#aperiô#, see #pariô#.

#apertê# [#apertus#], adv., _openly, plainly_.

#apertus# [orig. part. of #aperiô#], adj., _open, manifest_.

#Apollô, inis#, m., _Apollo_, the Greek god (worshiped by the Romans
also) of poetry and music, divination and medicine. His chief shrine was
at Delphi, in Greece.

#Apollônia, ae#, f., a city of Illyria, on the east coast of the
Adriatic. Toward the close of the first century B.C. it was a famous
seat of learning.

#Apollônius, î#, m., _Apollônius_, surnamed _Molô_, under whom Cicero
studied rhetoric at Rhodes.

#apparâtus, ûs#, m., _equipment, preparation_; _splendor, pomp_.

#appâreô#, see #pâreô#.

#appellâtiô, ônis# [(2) #appellô#], f., _name, title_.

(1) #appellô#, see #pellô#.

(2) #appellô#, see #pellô#.

#Appennînus, î#, m., _the Apennines_, a range of mountains in Italy.

#Appius, î#, m., a Roman praenomen, esp. common in the Claudian gens.

#applaudô, ere, plausî, plausus# [#ad# + #plaudô#, _to clap the hands_],
_to applaud_.

#appônô#, see #pônô#.

#apprehendô#, see #prehendô#.

#approbô#, see #probô#.

#appropinquô, âre, âvî, --# [#ad# + #propinquus#], _to draw near,
approach_.

#aptê# [#aptus#], adv., _fitly, neatly_.

#aptus#, adj., _fitted, suited for, adapted to_.

#apud#, prep. with acc.; of place, _near_; of persons, _with, among, in
the presence of, at the house of_; with the name of an author, _in the
works of_.

#Âpûlia, ae#, f., _Apulia_, a district in the southeastern part of
Italy.

#aqua, ae#, f., _water_.

#aquila, ae#, f., _an eagle_; _standard_ (a metal eagle, elevated upon a
pole).

#aquilifer, ferî# [#aquila# + #ferô#], m., _standard bearer_.

#âra, ae#, f., _an altar_.

#arbiter, trî#, m., _witness, judge, umpire_.

#arbitrium, î# [#arbiter#], n., _judgment, decision_; _will, caprice_.

#arbitror, ârî, âtus sum# [#arbiter#], _to think, believe, consider_.

#arbor, oris#, f., _a tree_.

#arca, ae# [#arceô#], f., _chest, box_.

#arceô, êre, uî, --#, _to shut up, inclose_; _hinder, prevent_.

  #con--coerceô, êre, uî, itus#, _to confine closely, shut in_;
  _restrain, check_.

  #ex--exerceô, êre, uî, itus#, _to exercise, drill, employ_; #lêgem
  exercêre#, _to enforce a law_.

#arcessô, ere, îvî, îtus#, _to cause to come, summon, send for_.

#Ardea, ae#, f., _Ardea_, a town in Latium, about eighteen miles south
of Rome.

#ârdêns, entis# [orig. part. of #ârdeô#, _to burn, glow_], adj.,
_glowing, fiery, bright_.

#ârdor, ôris# [#ârdeô#, _to burn, glow_], m., _heat, glow_; _zeal,
enthusiasm, fire_.

#argentum, î#, n., _silver_; _money_.

#Argî, ôrum#, m., _Argos_, a city in the northeastern part of the
Peloponnesus.

#Argîvus#, adj., of _Argos, Argive_.

#arguô, ere, î, ûtus#, _to show, prove_; _charge, accuse, blame_.

#âridus# [#âreô#, _to be dry_], adj., _dry, arid_.

#arma, ôrum#, n. pl., _arms, weapons_ (esp. for defense); _warfare_.

#armâtus# [orig. part. of #armô#], adj., _armed, in full armor_. As
noun, #armâtî, ôrum#, m. pl., _armed men, soldiers_.

#Armenia, ae#, f., _Armenia_, a country in Asia, southeast of the Black
Sea.

#armilla, ae# [#armus#, _shoulder, arm_], f., _a bracelet, armlet_.

#armô, âre, âvî, âtus# [#arma#], _to arm, equip_.

#Arpînum, î#, n., _Arpinum_, a town of the Volsci, fifty miles southeast
of Rome; the birthplace of Marius and Cicero.

#ars, artis#, f., _skill, art, knowledge_; _accomplishment_, esp. in
pl.; _device, stratagem_.

#artifex, icis# [#ars# + #faciô#], m., _workman, artist, builder_.

#artûs, uum#, m. pl., _joints, limbs_.

#Ârûns, untis#, m., a son of Tarquinius Superbus.

#arx, arcis# [#arceô#], f., _citadel, stronghold_.

#âs, assis#, m., _an as_, the unit of Roman coinage, orig. a pound of
copper, but finally reduced to half an ounce. It was then worth about a
cent.

#âscendô#, see #scandô#.

#Asia, ae#, f., _Asia_, esp. Asia Minor.

  #Asiâticus#, adj., _Asiatic_. As noun, #Asiâticus, î#, m., (cognomen
  of Lucius Cornelius Scipio, conqueror of Antiochus.

#asper, aspera, asperum#, adj., _rough, bitter, sharp_; _harsh, violent,
severe_.

#asperitâs, âtis# [#asper#], f., _roughness, harshness_; _acidity_
(of vinegar).

#âspernor#, see #spernô#.

#aspis, idis#, f., _an asp, viper_.

#âstûtia, ae# [#âstûtus#], f., _shrewdness, smartness, cleverness_.

#âstûtus# [#âstû#, _cunning_], adj., _smart, clever, shrewd, cunning_.

#asy:lum, î#, n., _place of refuge, asylum_.

#at#, conj., _but, but yet, nevertheless_.

#Athênae, ârum#, f. plur., _Athens_, the chief city of Greece, situated
in Attica, in the southeastern part of central Greece.

#Athesis, is#, m., a river in Cisalpine Gaul, near which Marius defeated
the Cimbri in 101 B.C.

#Atîlius, î#, m., the name of a Roman gens. See #Rêgulus#.

#atque, ac#, conj., _and, and also_.

#atquî#, conj., _and yet, but yet, yet_.

#atrôciter# [#atrôx#], adv., _fiercely, cruelly_.

#atrôx, ôcis#, adj., _savage, fierce, cruel, horrible_.

#attentus#, adj., _attentive_.

#attonitus# [#attonô#, _to thunder at_], adj., _thunder-struck,
awe-struck, overwhelmed_.

#Attus, î#, m., _Attus Nâvius_, an augur who defied Tarquinius Priscus.

#auctor, ôris# [#augeô#], m., _producer, originator, cause_.

#auctôritâs, âtis# [#auctor#], f., _authority, power_; _influence,
weight, dignity_.

#aucupium, î# [#avis# + #capiô#], n., _bird-catching, fowling_.

#audâcia, ae# [#audâx#, _bold_], f., _boldness, daring_; _rashness,
presumption_.

#audeô, êre, ausus sum#, _to venture, dare_.

#audiô, îre, îvî, îtus#, _to hear, listen to_; #dictô audiêns esse#, _to
obey_.

  #ex--exaudiô, îre, îvî, îtus#, _to hear clearly, distinguish_.

#auferô#, see #ferô#.

#aufugiô#, see #fugiô#.

#augeô, êre, auxî, auctus#, _to increase, enlarge_.

#augur, uris# [#avis#], m., _an augur, soothsayer_, a priest whose
business it was to take the _auspicia_. See #auspicium#.

#augurium, î# [#augur#], n., _observance of omens, divination_;
#augurium agere#, _to perform the augural ceremonies_.

#augustus# [#augeô#], adj., _majestic, venerable, imposing_.

#Augustus, î# [#augustus#], m., a title of honor given to Octavianus in
B.C. 27, and after him to all the Roman emperors.

#aureus# [#aurum#], adj., _golden_.

#auris, is#, f., _ear_.

#aurum, î#, n., _gold_.

#auspicium, î# [#avis# + #*speciô#], n., _divination_ by noting the
flight or cries of birds. In taking the #auspicia#, _auspices_, the
augur sought to learn whether the gods favored or disapproved a proposed
course of conduct.

#aut#, conj., _or_; #aut . . . aut#, _either . . . or_.

#autem#, conj., always postpositive, _but, however, moreover_.

#auxilium, î# [#augeô#], n., _help, aid_; plur., _auxiliary troops_
(usually foreign and light-armed troops).

#avâritia, ae# [#avârus#], f., _greed, avarice_.

#avârus#, adj., _greedy, grasping, covetous_.

#âvellô, ere, vellî, vulsus# [#ab# + #vellô#, _to pluck_], _to tear off_
or _away, sever_.

#Aventînus, î#, m. (sc. #môns#), _the Aventine_, one of the seven hills
of Rome.

#Aventînus#, adj., _of_ or _on the Aventine_.

#aveô, êre, --, --#, _to fare well_, used only in the imperative #avê!#
_hail! welcome! greetings!_

#âversor, ârî, âtus sum# [#âvertô#], _to scorn, repulse_.

#âvertô#, see #vertô#.

#avidê# [#avidus#], adv., _eagerly, greedily_.

#avidus#, adj., _desirous, eager, greedy_.

#avis, is#, f., _bird_; _sign, omen_.

#avîtus# [#avus#], adj., _ancestral_.

#âvocô#, see #vocô#.

#âvolô#, see (2) #volô#.

#avunculus# [dim. of #avus#], m., _uncle, mother's brother_.

#avus, î#, m., _grandfather, ancestor_.


#B#

#baculum, î#, n., _a staff, stick_.

#Bagrada(s), ae#, m., a river near Carthage.

#ballista, ae#, f., _the ballista_, a military engine for hurling
stones.

#balneum, î#, n., _bath, bathing-place_.

#barba, ae#, f., _beard_.

#barbarus#, adj., _foreign, uncivilized, barbarous_. As noun, #barbarî,
ôrum#, pl. m., _foreigners, barbarians_.

#bellâtor, ôris# [#bellô#], m., _fighter, brawler_; _warrior, soldier_.

#bellicôsus# [#bellicus#, _warlike_], adj., _warlike_.

#bellô, âre, âvî, âtum# [#bellum#], _to wage war, fight_.

  #re--rebellô, âre, âvî, âtum#, _to wage war again, rebel_.

#bellum, î# (orig. #duellum#, from #duo#), n., _war, warfare_.

#bêlua, ae#, f., _a wild beast_; of a person, _beast, brute, monster_.

#bene# [#bonus#], adv., _well, successfully_; comp. #melius#, sup.
#optimê#.

#beneficium, î# [#bene# + #faciô#], n., _favor, kindness, service_.

#benevolentia, ae# [#bene# + (1) #volô#], f., _good will, kindly
feeling_; _favor_.

#benîgnê# [#benîgnus#], adv., _kindly, courteously_.

#benîgnus#, adj., _kind, favorable_.

#bibliothêca, ae#, f., _library_.

#bibô, ere, î, --#, _to drink_.

#Bibulus, î#, m., _L. Calpurnius_, consul with Julius Caesar in 59 B.C.

#bîduum, î# [#bis# + #diês#], n., _a period of two days, two days'
time_.

#bis# [orig. #duis#; cf. #duo#], num. adv., _twice_.

#blanditia, ae#, f., _flattery_; in pl., _blandishments, allurements_.

#Blosius, î#, m., gentile name of _C. Blosius Cûmânus_, a friend of
C. Gracchus.

#Bocchus, î#, m., _Bocchus_, king of the Gaetuli, and ally of Jugurtha.

#Boiorix, icis#, m., _Boiorix_, chief of the Cimbri, defeated by Marius,
101 B.C.

#bonus#, comp. #melior#, sup. #optimus#, adj., _good_; as noun, #bonî,
ôrum#, m. pl., _good men, loyal citizens_; #bona, ôrum#, n. pl., _goods,
possessions_.

#bôs, bovis#, m. and f., _ox, cow_; pl., _cattle_.

#bracchium, î#, n., _forearm, arm_.

#brevî#, see #brevis#.

#brevis, e#, adj., _short_; #brevî# (sc. #tempore#), adv., _in a little
while, soon_.

#Britannî, ôrum#, m. pl., _the inhabitants of England, the Britons_.

#Brundisium, î#, n., _Brundisium_, a seaport in southeastern Italy, the
regular point of embarkation for Greece.

#Brûtus, î#, m., a cognomen in the Junian gens.

  1. _L. Iûnius Brûtus_, the Liberator, nephew of Tarquinius Superbus,
  and consul with Collatinus in 509 B.C.

  2. _M. Iûnius Brûtus_, one of the murderers of Julius Caesar, 44
  B.C.

  3. _D. Iûnius Brûtus_, an officer of Julius Caesar in Gaul, but
  afterwards one of his murderers.

#bulla, ae#, f., an _amulet_ or _charm_ for the neck, commonly of gold,
though often of leather. It was worn by children of free birth, but laid
aside with the _toga praetexta_ (see #praetextus#), and consecrated to
the _Larês_, or gods of the hearth.


#C#

#C#, orig. = English _G_, later = both _C_ and _G_, finally = _C_ alone;
with proper names = _Gâius_, a Roman praenomen.

#cadâver, eris# [#cadô#], n., _a corpse_.

#cadô, ere, cecidî, câsûrus#, _to fall_; _fall dead, be killed, die_;
_happen_.

  #ad--accidô, ere, cidî, --#, _to happen, befall, come to pass_.

  #con--concidô, ere, cidî,--#, _to fall, be slain, perish_.

  #in--incidô, ere, cidî,--#, _fall, fall into_ or _on, meet_;
  _happen, occur_; #incidere in aliquem#, _to happen in the time of
  anybody_.

  #ob--occidô, ere, cidî, --#, _fall down, fall, perish_; _set_
  (of the sun).

  #re--recidô, ere, cidî, --#, _to fall back, return_; _fall_.

#caedês, is# [#caedô#], f., _slaughter, massacre_.

#caedô, ere, cecîdî, caesus#, _to cut, cut to pieces_; _kill, conquer,
rout_; #virgîs caedere#, _to flog_.

  #ob--occîdô, ere, cîdî, cîsus#, _to cut down, kill, slay_.

  #prae--praecîdô, ere, cîdî, cîsus#, _to cut short, cut off_.

#caelestis, e# [#caelum#], adj., _from heaven, heavenly, celestial_.

#Caelius, î#, m. (sc. #môns#), _the Caelian hill_, one of the seven
hills of Rome.

#caelum, î#, n., _the sky, heavens_.

#caenôsus# [#caenum#], adj., _foul, filthy_.

#caenum, î#, n., _mud, filth, mire_.

#Caesar, aris#, m., _Caesar_, a family name in the Julian gens.

  1. _C. Iûlius Caesar_, the famous dictator, born 100 B.C., quaestor
  in 68, aedile in 65, praetor in 62, consul in 59; conquered Gaul,
  58-50; engaged in civil war with Pompey and his supporters, 49-46;
  created perpetual dictator in 46; murdered, March 15, 44.

  2. The grandson of Caesar's sister, _C. Octâvius_, was adopted by
  Caesar, and henceforth known as _C. Iûlius Caesar Octâviânus_. He
  was born 63 B.C., formed the second triumvirate with Antony and
  Lepidus in 44; with Antony's help defeated Brutus and Cassius, the
  murderers of Caesar, in 42, at Philippi; defeated Antony at Actium,
  in 31, and became sole master of the Roman world, which he ruled
  till his death in 14 A.D. See also #Augustus#.

#caesariês, --#, acc. #em#, f., _hair_ (of the head), _locks_ (only in
sing.).

#calamitâs, âtis#, f., _calamity, disaster_.

#calcar, âris#, n., _a spur_.

#callidus#, adj., _shrewd, cunning, sly_.

#Calpurnia, ae#, f., _Calpurnia_, daughter of L. Calpurnius Piso, and
wife of Julius Caesar.

#Calpurnius, î#, m., the name of a Roman gens. See #Bibulus#.

#calvitium, î# [#calvus#], n., _baldness_.

#calvus#, adj., _bald_.

#Calvus, î# [#calvus#], m., cognomen of _C. Licinius Macer Calvus_, poet
and orator, 82-47 B.C.

#Camers, ertis#, m., an inhabitant of Camerinum, a town of Umbria,
a district in Central Italy.

#Campânia, ae#, f., a district on the west coast of Italy, south of
Latium.

#Campânus#, adj., _Campanian_.

#campus, î#, m., _a field_, especially the #Campus Mârtius#, a plain
lying between the Capitoline Hill and the Tiber, and thus orig. outside
the walls. It was used as a place of exercise, as a parade ground and
place for reviews. Later, elections were held there.

#candeô, êre, uî, --#, _to shine, glow_.

  #ad--accendô, ere, î, cênsus#, _to set fire to, kindle, burn_;
  _arouse, fire, anger_.

  #in--incendô, ere, î, cênsus#, _to set on fire_; _arouse, excite_.

#candidus# [#candeô#], adj., _white_.

#Canînius, î#, m., gentile name of _C. Canînius Rêbilus_, consul for a
few hours on December 31, 45 B.C.

#canis, is#, m. and f., _a dog_.

#Cannae, ârum#, f. pl., a small town in Apulia in southeastern Italy.

#Cannênsis, e#, adj., _of_ or _at Cannae_.

#canô, ere, cecinî, --#, _to sing, chant, play_; _sound, give signal_.

  #prae--praecinô, ere, uî, --#, _to play before_ (one).

#cantus, ûs# [#canô#], m., _song_; _note, cry_.

#Canusium, î#, n., a town in Apulia near Cannae.

#capesso, ere, îvî, îtus# [desid. of #capiô#], _to take eagerly, seize,
resort to_.

#capillus, î# [#caput#], m., _the hair_.

#capiô, ere, cêpî, captus#, _to take, seize, capture_; #cônsilium
capere#, _to form a plan_.

  #ad--accipiô, ere, cêpî, ceptus#, _to take to one's self, receive,
  adopt_; _meet with, welcome_; _understand, interpret_.

  #con--concipiô, ere, cêpî, ceptus#, _to take in, imagine, conceive_.

  #dê--dêcipiô, ere, cêpî, ceptus#, _to take in, catch, deceive,
  cheat_.

  #ex--excipiô, ere, cêpî, ceptus#, _to take out, appropriate,
  overhear_; _receive, greet_; _await, confront_.

  #in--incipiô, ere, cêpî, ceptus#, _to take up, begin, undertake_.

  #inter--intercipiô, ere, cêpî, ceptus#, _to seize in passing, steal,
  usurp_.

  #prae--praecipiô, ere, cêpî, ceptum#, _direct, bid, order_.

  #re--recipiô, ere, cêpî, ceptus#, _to take back, recover_; _take,
  receive_; #sê recipere#, _to retreat, withdraw_.

  #sub--suscipiô, ere, cêpî, ceptus#, _to take up, undertake, assume,
  succeed to_.

#Capitôlînus#, adj., _pertaining to the Capitol_.

#Capitôlium, î#, n., _the Capitol_, the chief temple of Jupiter in Rome;
often, also, the hill on which this temple stood, the _Môns
Capitôlînus_, the citadel of Rome.

#capra, ae#, f., _a she-goat_; #Caprae palûs#, _Goat Swamp_, in the
Campus Martius.

#captîvus# [#capiô#], adj., _captive_; as noun, #captîvus, î#, m., _a
prisoner, captive_.

#captô, âre, âvî, âtus# [freq. of #capiô#], _to seize eagerly, strive to
seize, strive for_; _take in, deceive, trap_.

#Capua, ae#, f., a city in Campania noted for its luxury.

#capulus, î# [#capiô#], m., _hilt, handle_.

#caput, itis#, n., _the head, life_; _head_ or _capital_ of a nation;
#capite damnâre#, _to condemn to death_.

#carbô, inis#, m., _a coal, charcoal_.

#Carbô, inis#, m., _C. Papîrius_, an enemy of Sulla, defeated by Pompey.

#carcer, eris#, n., _a prison_, esp. the state prison at Rome, built by
Ancus Marcius, and known since the middle ages as the 'Mamertine
Prison.' It lay at the foot of the Capitoline Hill, on the side towards
the Forum. The historian Sallust thus describes it: "In the prison there
is a place called the _Tulliânum_, about twelve feet below the surface
of the ground. It is built with strong walls, and above it there is a
room constructed with stone vaulting. It is a disgusting and horrible
place on account of the filth, the darkness, and the stench."

#carnifex, ficis# [#carô#, _flesh_ + #faciô#], m., _executioner,
butcher_.

#carpentum, î#, n., _a two-wheeled carriage_.

#carpô, ere, sî, tus#, _to pluck, tear_.

  #dis--discerpô, ere, sî, tus#, _to pluck_ or _tear in pieces_.

  #ex--excerpô, ere, sî, tus#, _to pluck out, choose, select_.

#Carthâginiênsis, e#, adj., _Carthaginian_.

#Carthâgô, inis#, f., _Carthage_, a city on the northern coast of
Africa, colonized by Phoenicians from Tyre.

#Carthâgô Nova#, f., _New Carthage_, a city on the east coast of Spain,
founded by the Carthaginians.

#cârus#, adj., _dear, beloved_; _costly_.

#casa, ae#, f., _a hut, cottage_.

#Casca, ae#, m., _C. Servîlius_, one of the murderers of Julius Caesar.

#Cassius, î#, m., gentile name of _C. Cassius Longînus_, one of the
foremost conspirators against Caesar in 44 B.C.

#castellum, î# [dim. of #castrum#], n., _a stronghold, castle, fort_.

#castîgô, âre, âvî, âtus# [#castus#, _pure_ + #agô#], _to correct,
punish, chastise_.

#castrum, î#, n., _a fortified place_; pl., #castra, ôrum#, _a camp_.

#câsus, ûs# [#cadô#], m., _that which befalls, accident, chance_;
_misfortune, calamity_.

#catapulta, ae#, f., _an engine for hurling arrows, catapult_.

#catêna, ae#, f., _a chain, fetter_.

#Catilîna, ae#, m., _L. Sergius_, who conspired against the state during
Cicero's consulship, 63 B.C.

#catîllus, î#, m., _a small dish, plate_.

#Catô, ônis#, m., _M. Porcius_, called _Uticênsis_, because he committed
suicide at Utica in Africa, after the battle of Thapsus 46 B.C.

#Catullus, î#, m., _C. Valerius_, the famous lyric poet, 87-54 B.C.

#catulus, î#, m., _a young animal, cub_.

#Catulus, î#, m., _Q. Lutâtius_, who in 67 B.C. opposed the grant of
extraordinary powers to Pompey for the war with the pirates.

#cauda, ae#, f., _tail_.

#causa, ae#, f., _cause, reason, occasion_; _case at law_; #causâ# (with
preceding gen.), _for the sake of_, a common expression of purpose;
#causam dîcere#, _to plead a case_ in court.

#cautus# [orig. part. of #caveô#], adj., _careful, wary, cautious_.

#cavea, ae# [#cavus#, _hollow_], f., _a cage_.

#caveô, êre, câvî, cautus#, _to be on one's guard, beware, guard
against_.

#cêdô, ere, cessî, cessum#, _to go, move_; _to go from, retire_; _yield,
submit_; #ex sententiâ cêdere#, _to turn out to one's satisfaction_.

  #ab--abscêdô, ere, cessî, cessûrus#, _to go away, withdraw, depart_.

  #ad--accêdô, ere, cessî, cessûrus#, _to go_ or _come to, move
  towards, approach_; _be added_.

  #ante--antecêdô, ere, cessî, --#, _to go before, precede._

  #con--concêdô, ere, cessî, cessus#, _to withdraw, retire, depart_;
  _yield, submit_; _allow, grant, concede_.

  #dê--dêcêdô, ere, cessî, cessum#, _to go away, withdraw, depart_;
  _to die_ (sc. #vîtâ#).

  #dis--discêdô, ere, cessî, cessum#, _to go away, depart_; _come
  off_.

  #in--incêdô, ere, cessî, cessûrus#, _to advance, approach_; _march_;
  _move slowly_.

  #prae--praecêdô, ere, cessî, cessûrus#, _to go before_.

  #prô--prôcêdô, ere, cessî, cessum#, _to move forward, advance, make
  progress_.

  #re--recêdô, ere, cessî, cessum#, _to move back, withdraw, retire,
  retreat_.

  #sê--sêcêdô, ere, cessî, cessûrus#, _to retire, withdraw_.

  #sub--succêdô, ere, cessî, cessum#, _to follow, succeed_; _be
  successful_.

#celeber, bris, bre#, adj., _famous_.

#celebrâtus# [part. of #celebrô#, _to throng_], adj., of a place,
_thronged, frequented_; of persons, places, or things, _famous,
brilliant_.

#celer, eris, ere#, adj., _swift, quick, lively_.

#celeritâs, âtis# [#celer#], f., _swiftness, speed, alertness_.

#celeriter# [#celer#], adv., _quickly, soon_.

#cella, ae#, f., _chamber, sanctuary, shrine_.

#cêlô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to hide, conceal_.

#Celtibêrî, ôrum#, m. pl., _the Celtiberi_, a tribe in Spain.

#cêna, ae#, f., _dinner_, the principal meal of the Romans, taken about
three o'clock.

#cênô, âre, âvî, âtus# [#cêna#], _to dine, eat_.

#cênseô, êre, uî, us#, _to rate, value_; _be of the opinion, think_;
_determine, decide_.

#cênsus, ûs# [#cênseô#], m., _an enumeration_ and _classification of the
people_ according to wealth, _a census_.

#centiês# [#centum#], adv., _a hundred times_.

#centum#, indecl. num. adj., _a hundred_.

#centuria, ae# [#centum#], f., _a division of the army or the people_,
containing a hundred persons, _a century_.

#centuriô, ônis# [#centuria#], m., _a commander of a century, centurion,
captain_.

#cernô, ere, crêvî, certus# [#crêtus#], _to separate_; _see, perceive_;
_decide, determine_.

  #dê--dêcernô, ere, crêvî, crêtus#, _to decide, determine_; _decree,
  vote, entrust_ (by a decree); _contend, fight_.

  #sê--sêcernô, ere, crêvî, crêtus#, _to separate, divide_.

#certâmen, inis# [#certô#], n., _match, trial_ of skill or strength;
_contest, battle_.

#certâtim# [#certô#], adv., _in rivalry, zealously_.

#certê# [#certus#], adv., _certainly, surely_.

#certô, âre, âvî, âtum# [#certus#], _to vie with, contend_.

#certus# [orig. part. of #cernô#], adj., _determined, fixed_; _certain,
definite, specified, assured_; #certiôrem facere#, _to inform_; #certior
fierî#, _to be informed_.

#cervîx, îcis#, f., _neck, throat_.

#cessô, âre, âvî, âtum# [freq. of #cêdô#], _to be inactive, loiter,
delay_.

#cêterum# [#cêterus#], adv. and conj., _for the rest, but, moreover,
besides_.

#cêterî, ae, a#, adj., _the rest, the other, the others_.

#charta, ae#, f., _writing material, paper, sheet_ (of Egyptian
papyrus).

#Chry:sogonus, î#, m., _L. Cornêlius_, a freedman of Sulla.

#cibârius# [#cibus#], adj., _pertaining to food_; #rês cibâria#,
_provisions_.

#cibus, î#, m., _food, victuals_.

#cicâtrîx, îcis#, f., _a scar_.

#cicer, ciceris#, n., _a pea, chickpea_.

#Cicerô, ônis# [#cicer#], m., cognomen of _M. Tullius Cicerô_, the
famous orator, born at Arpinum, 106 B.C.; quaestor in Sicily, 75;
praetor, 66; consul, 63; killed by Antony's order in 43.

#Cimber, brî#, m., _a Cimbrian_, one of the Cimbri, the Teutonic tribe
which, together with the Teutones, invaded Italy, and was defeated by
Marius in 101 B.C.

#Cimbricus#, adj., _Cimbrian_.

#cingô, ere, cinxî, cinctus#, _to encircle, surround_; _gird, gird on,
equip_; #obsidiône cingere#, _to blockade, besiege_.

  #ad--accingô, ere, cinxî, cinctus#, _to gird, gird on, equip, arm_.

  #sub--succingô, ere, cinxî, cinctus#, _to gird, arm, equip_.

#cinis, eris#, m., _ashes_.

#Cinna, ae#, m., _L. Cornêlius_, leader with Marius of the popular
party.

#circâ#, adv. and prep, with acc., _around, round about, throughout_.

#circum#, adv. and prep, with acc., _around, about_.

#circumdô#, see #dô#.

#circumfundô#, see #fundô#.

#circumstô#, see #stô#.

#circumveniô#, see #veniô#.

#circus, î#, m., _a circle, enclosure_ for athletic sports, esp.
chariot-races; #Circus Mâximus#: see p. 18, n. 6.

#citerior, ôris#, adj., _on this side, hither, nearer_.

#citô, âre, âvî, âtus# [freq. of #cieô#, _to set in motion_], _to rouse,
urge on_; _summon_.

  #con--concitô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to rouse, excite_; _move,
  instigate_.

  #ex--excitô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to call or bring forth_; _rouse,
  excite_.

  #in--incitô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _urge on, arouse, incite_.

#cîvicus# [#cîvis#], adj., _of citizens, civic_; #cîvica corôna#, _the
civic crown_, given to a soldier who saved the life of a citizen in
battle.

#cîvîlis, e# [#cîvis#], adj., _of citizens, civil, civic_; _courteous,
polite_.

#cîvis, is#, m., _citizen, fellow-citizen_.

#cîvitâs, âtis# [#cîvis#], f., _citizenship_; _state, body of citizens_.

#clâdês, is#, f., _disaster, overthrow, defeat_; #clâdem accipere#, _to
sustain a defeat_; #clâde adficere#, _to defeat_.

#clam# [#cêlô#], adv., _secretly_.

#clâmitô, âre, âvî, âtus# [freq. of #clâmô#], _to cry aloud, shout
loudly_.

#clâmô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to shout_.

  #ad--acclâmô, âre, âvî, âtum#, _to shout loudly, exclaim_.

  #con--conclâmô, âre, âvî, âtum#, _cry out together, shout_.

  #ex--exclâmô, âre, âvî, âtum#, _to cry out, shout aloud, exclaim_.

  #in--inclâmô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _shout loudly_; _cry out to, call
  upon, appeal to_.

  #prô--prôclâmô, âre, âvî, âtum#, _to call, cry out, proclaim_.

  #sub--succlâmô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to shout in answer, to answer
  loudly_.

#clâmor, ôris# [#clâmô#], m., _shout, cry, noise_.

#clandestînus# [#clam#], adj., _secret_.

#clangor, ôris#, m., _noise, clash, clang_.

#clârus#, adj., _bright_; _famous, renowned_; of sound, _clear, loud_.

#classicum, î# [#classis#], n. (sc. #sîgnum#), _battle signal_ on the
trumpet.

#classis, is#, f., _a class_ or _division of citizens_; _a fleet_.

#Claudia, ae#, f., a sister of Appius Claudius Pulcher.

#Claudius, î#, m., the name of a famous Roman gens.

  1. _Appius Claudius_, one of the Decemvirs of 451 B.C.

  2. _Appius Claudius Pulcher_, consul in 249 B.C., and defeated in a
  naval battle off Drepanum in Sicily.

#claudô, ere, clausî, clausus#, _to shut, close_; _shut in, imprison_.

#ex--exclûdô, ere, clûsî, clûsus#, _to shut out, exclude_.

#in--inclûdô, ere, clûsî, clûsus#, _to shut in, enclose_; _imprison_.

#clausula, ae# [#claudô#], f., _conclusion_.

#clâvus, î#, m., _a nail_.

#clêmêns, entis#, adj., _gentle, kindly, merciful_.

#clêmenter# [#clêmêns#], adv., _quietly, mercifully, mildly_.

#clêmentia, ae# [#clêmêns#], f., _mercifulness, forbearance, kindness_.

#Cleopatra, ae#, f., the famous queen of Egypt, renowned for her wit and
beauty. She lived 69-30 B.C.

#cliêns, entis# [orig. #cluêns#, from #clueô#, _to hear_], m., _a
vassal, dependent, client_. The #clientês# attached themselves to some
patrician, who aided them in business, esp. legal business, and was
practically their father or guardian. The clients in turn were bound to
respect and serve their patron, and to assist him financially, esp. in
ransoming him, if captured, and in providing a marriage portion for his
daughters.

#clîvus, î#, m., _ascent, slope, hill_; #Clîvus Capitôlînus#, a street
running up from the Forum to the Capitol.

#Clôdius, î#, m., plebeian form of Claudius, the gentile name of
_P. Clôdius Pulcher_, Cicero's enemy, who, as tribune of the people,
brought about his banishment.

#Clypea, ae#, f., a fortified town in Africa, near Carthage.

#Cn.#, abbreviation of the name #Gnaeus#.

#coepî, coepisse, coeptus#, _to begin_.

#coerceô#, see #arceô#.

#côgitâtiô, ônis# [#côgitô#], f., _thought, consideration, plan_.

#côgitô#, see #agitô#.

#côgnâtiô, ônis# [#côgnâtus#], f., _blood relationship, ties of blood_.

#côgnâtus# [#con# + #(g)nâscor#], adj., _related by blood_; as noun, _a
kinsman, blood relation_.

#côgnitiô, ônis# [#côgnôscô#], f., _a legal investigation, judicial
hearing_; #côgnitiônem înstituere#, _to hold a hearing_.

#côgnômen, inis# [#con# + #(g)nômen#], n., a name added to the
individual and clan names of a person; _a surname_, either as a title of
honor, as #Âfricânus, Mâgnus, Torquâtus#, or as a nickname, as #Cicerô#.
_Côgnômina_ served to distinguish different families of the same gens.

#côgnôminô, âre, âvî, âtus# [#côgnômen#], _to surname, call_.

#côgnôscô#, see #nôscô#.

#côgô#, see #agô#.

#cohors, ortis#, f., _cohort, company_ (the tenth part of a legion). See
#legiô#.

#Collâtia, ae#, f., a Sabine town near Rome.

#Collâtînus, î#, m., _L. Tarquinius_, the husband of Lucretia, and one
of the first two consuls, 509 B.C.

#collis, is#, m., _a hill_.

#collum, î#, n., _neck_.

#colô, ere, uî, cultus#, to _till, cultivate_; _dwell in_; _practice,
cherish_; _clothe, adorn_; _honor, esteem_.

  #ex--excolô, ere, uî, cultus#, _to cultivate, improve, adorn_;
  _refine_.

  #in--incolô, ere, uî, --#, _to dwell, dwell in, live_.

#colônia, ae# [#colô#], f., _a colony, settlement_.

#columba, ae#, f., _a dove, pigeon_.

#com, con, co#, forms of the prep. #cum#, found only in compound words.
See #cum#.

#combûrô#, see #ûrô#.

#comes, itis# [#con# + (1) #eô#], m., _companion, comrade_; _attendant,
follower_.

#cômitâs, âtis# [#cômis#, _courteous_], f., _courtesy, kindness_.

#comitâtus, ûs# [#comitor#], m., _escort, train_.

#comitium, î# [#con# + (1) #eô#], n., _the Comitium_, a place adjoining
the Forum Romanum, where the voters assembled; #comitia, ôrum#, _the
comitia_, an assembly of the people (esp. for elections); _election_;
#comitia indîcere#, _to set a date for an election_.

#comitor, ârî, âtus sum# [#comes#], _to accompany_.

#commeâtus, ûs#, m., _a furlough_.

#commendô#, see #mandô#.

#commigrô#, see #migrô#.

#commîlitô, ônis# [#con# + #mîles#], m., _fellow-soldier, comrade_.

#comminus# [#con# + #manus#], adv., _hand to hand, at close quarters_.

#committô#, see #mittô#.

#commodê# [#commodus#], adv., _properly, fittingly, rightly_.

#commodus# [#con# + #modus#], adj., _in due measure, suitable, fit,
convenient_.

#commoveô#, see #moveô#.

#commûniô#, see #mûniô#.

#commûnis, e# [#con# + #mûnus#], adj., _common, joint, general_.

#commûniter# [#commûnis#], adv., _in common, together_.

#commûtô#, see #mûtô#.

#cômô#, see #emô#.

#compâr, paris# [#con# + #pâr#], adj., _equal to, like_; _fitting,
suitable_.

#comparô#, see #parô#.

#compellô#, see #pellô#.

#comperiô#, see #pariô#.

#compês, edis# [#con# + #pês#], f., usually in the pl., _shackles,
fetters_.

#complector, î, plexus sum#, _to embrace_.

#compleô#, see #*pleô#.

#complôrâtiô, ônis# [#complôrô#, _to bewail_], f., _lamentation,
wailing_.

#complûrês, a# or #ia# [#con# + #plûs#], adj., _several, many, very
many_.

#compônô#, see #pônô#.

#compos, potis# [#con# + #potis#, _able_], adj., _master of_; #vôtî
compos fierî#, _to gain one's heart's desire_.

#compositum, î# [#compônô#], n., _agreement_.

#comprehendô#, see #prehendô#.

#comprimô#, see #premô#.

#comprobô#, see #probô#.

#computô#, see #putô#.

#con#, see #com#.

#concêdô#, see #cêdô#.

#concidô#, see #cadô#.

#conciliô, âre, âvî, âtus# [#concilium#], _to bring together,
conciliate_; _win over, secure_.

  #re--reconciliô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to reunite, reconcile_.

#concilium, î# [#con# + #calô#, _to call_], n., _assembly, gathering_.

#concipiô#, see #capiô#.

#concitô#, see #citô#.

#conclâmô#, see #clâmô#.

#concordia, ae# [#con# + #cor#, _heart_], f., _union, harmony, concord_.

#concupîscô, ere, cupîvî, cupîtus# [#con# + #cupiô#], _to desire
greatly, crave_.

#concurrô#, see #currô#.

#concursus, ûs# [#concurrô#], m., _a concourse, throng_; _attack,
charge, onset_.

#condemnô#, see #damnô#.

#condiciô, ônis# [#condîcô#, _to agree_], f., _agreement, stipulation,
terms_.

#condô#, see #dô#.

#condûcô#, see #dûcô#.

#cônferô#, see #ferô#.

#cônfertus# [part. of #cônferciô#, _to stuff together_], adj., _crowded,
dense_.

#cônfessiô, ônis# [#cônfiteor#], f., _confession, acknowledgment_.

#cônfêstim#, adv., _immediately, at once_.

#cônficiô#, see #faciô#.

#cônfîdentia, ae# [#cônfîdô#, _to trust_], f., _boldness, assurance,
confidence_.

#cônfîrmâtus# [orig. part. of #cônfîrmô#], adj., _courageous, resolute_.

#cônfîrmô#, see #fîrmô#.

#cônfiteor#, see #fateor#.

#cônflagrô, âre, âvî, --# [#con# + #flagrô#, _to burn_], _to burn, be
destroyed_ (by fire).

#cônflîgô#, see #*flîgô#.

#cônflô#, see #flô#.

#cônfluô#, see #fluô#.

#cônfodiô#, see #fodiô#.

#cônfugiô#, see #fugiô#.

#congerô#, see #gerô#.

#congredior#, see #gradior#.

#congressus, ûs# [#congredior#], m., _meeting, interview, encounter,
fight_.

#congruô, ere, î, --#, _to agree, tally_.

#coniciô#, see #iaciô#.

#coniungô#, see #iungô#.

#coniunx# or #coniux# [#coniungô#], m. and f., _married person, husband,
wife_.

#coniûrâtiô, ônis# [#coniûrô#], f., _a conspiracy, plot_.

#coniûrâtî, ôrum# [orig. part. of #coniûrô#], m. pl., _conspirators_.

#coniûrô#, see #iûrô#.

#coniux#, see #coniunx#.

#conlaudô#, see #laudô#.

#conlêga, ae# [#con# + #legô#], m., _one chosen at the same time,
a colleague_.

#conligô#, see #legô#.

#conlocô#, see #locô#.

#conloquium, î# [#conloquor#], n., _an interview, conference_.

#conloquor#, see #loquor#.

#cônor, ârî, âtus sum#, to _attempt, try_.

#conqueror#, see #queror#.

#conquîrô#, see #quaerô#.

#cônsalûtô#, see #salûtô#.

#cônscendô#, see #scandô#.

#cônscientia, ae# [#con# + #sciô#], f., _consciousness, knowledge_.

#cônscîscô#, see #scîscô#.

#cônscius# [#con# + #sciô#], adj., _acquainted with, aware of_.

#cônscrîbô#, see #scrîbô#.

#cônscrîptus# [orig. part. of #cônscrîbô#], adj., _enrolled_; #patrês
cônscrîptî#, the official title of the senators. Roman writers took this
phrase as = #patrês et cônscrîptî#, explaining #patrês# as _patricians_,
of whom orig. the senate was wholly composed, and #cônscrîptî# as
denoting the plebeians newly enrolled in the senate in 509 B.C., after
the expulsion of the kings. It may, however, = _enrolled patricians_, to
distinguish the senators from the patricians who were not enrolled in
the senate.

#cônsecrô#, see #sacrô#.

#cônsênsus, ûs# [#cônsentiô#], m., _united opinion, consent, agreement_.

#cônsentiô#, see #sentiô#.

#cônsequor#, see #sequor#.

#cônserô#, see #serô#.

#cônservô#, see #servô#.

#cônsîderô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to look at closely, examine, reflect,
consider_.

#cônsîdô#, see #sîdô#.

#cônsilium, î# [cf. #cônsulô#], n., _plan, scheme_; _judgment, wit,
sense, shrewdness_; #cônsilium capere# or #inîre#, _to plan_.

#cônsistô#, see #sistô#.

#cônsobrînus, î# [#con# + #soror#], m., _first-cousin, cousin_.

#cônsôlor, ârî, âtus sum# [#con# + #sôlor#, _to comfort_], _to comfort,
cheer_.

#cônspectus, ûs# [#cônspiciô#], m., _sight, view_.

#cônspiciô#, see #*speciô#.

#cônspicuus# [#cônspiciô#], adj., _in plain sight, conspicuous,
remarkable_.

#cônspîrâtiô, ônis# [#cônspîrô#, _to breathe together, plot_], f., _a
plot_.

#cônspîrâtî, ôrum# [#cônspîrô#, _to plot_], m. pl., _conspirators_.

#cônstâns, antis# [orig. part. of #cônstô#], adj., _of strong character,
firm, resolute_; _steadfast, consistent_.

#cônstanter# [#cônstâns#], adv., _firmly, resolutely, steadfastly_.

#cônstantia, ae# [#cônstâns#], f., a typical Roman virtue, _strength of
character, steadiness of purpose, firmness_; _courage, faithfulness_.

#cônsternô#, see #sternô#.

#cônstituô#, see #statuô#.

#cônstô#, see #stô#.

#cônsuêscô#, see #suêscô#.

#cônsuêtûdô, inis# [#cônsuêtus#, part. of #cônsuêscô#], f., _habit,
custom_.

#cônsul, ulis#, m., _a consul_, the title given to the two highest
officials of the Roman republic. The office was created in 509 B.C. At
first its powers were equal to those of the kings, except in religious
matters. Later, certain of these powers were transferred to other
magistrates. The consuls were elected annually; their joint names were
used in giving dates. At the close of their official term, the consuls
usually governed a province for a year as proconsuls.

#cônsulâris, e# [#cônsul#], adj., _of consular rank_; as noun, _an
ex-consul_.

#cônsulâtus, ûs# [#cônsul#], m., _consulship_.

#cônsulô, ere, uî, tus#, _to take counsel, deliberate_; _to take counsel
with, to consult_; #graviter cônsulere#, _to take vigorous measures_.

#cônsultô, âre, âvî, âtus# [freq. of #cônsulô#], _to take counsel,
deliberate_.

#cônsûmô#, see #sûmô#.

#contemnô, ere, tempsî, temptus#, _to despise, scorn_.

#contemptor, ôris# [#contemnô#], m., _one who despises, scorner_.

#contendô#, see #tendô#.

#contentiô, ônis# [#contendô#], f., _straining, effort, energy_;
_dispute, strife_.

#contentus# [orig. part. of #contineô#], adj., _content, satisfied
with_.

#continentia, ae# [#contineô#], f., _self-restraint, moderation_.

#contineô#, see #teneô#.

#contingô#, see #tangô#.

#continuô# [#continuus#], adv., _forthwith, straightway_.

#continuus# [#contineô#], adj., _uninterrupted, continuous, successive,
incessant_.

#côntiô, ônis# [orig. #co(n)ventiô#, from #conveniô#], f., _an assembly,
meeting_.

#contrâ#, prep. with acc., _against, contrary to_.

#contrahô#, see #trahô#.

#contrârius# [#contrâ#], adj., _opposite, contrary_.

#contubernâlis, is# [#con# + #taberna#, _a tent_], m., _tent-companion,
comrade_.

#contumêlia, ae#, f., _insult, reproach, abuse_.

#contundô# [#con# + #tundô#, _to beat, strike_], _to crush, destroy_.

#contus, î#, m., _a pole, pike_.

#cônûbium, î# [#con# + #nûbô#], n., _marriage, right of intermarriage_.

#convalêscô, ere, valuî, --# [#con# + #valeô#], _to begin to be well,
recover_.

#conveniêns, entis# [#conveniô#], adj., _agreeing or consistent with,
befitting_.

#conveniô#, see #veniô#.

#convertô#, see #vertô#.

#convincô#, see #vincô#.

#convîvium, î# [#con# + #vîvô#], n., _a feast_.

#convocô#, see #vocô#.

#coorior#, see #orior#.

#cophinus, î#, m., _a basket_.

#côpia, ae# [#co(n)# + #ops#], f., _abundance, supply_; _opportunity_;
in pl., _resources, forces, troops_.

#côpiôsê# [#côpiôsus#], adv., _abundantly_; _of speech, fluently,
eloquently_.

#côpiôsus# [#côpia#], adj., _abounding in, well supplied_.

#coquus, î#, m., _a cook_.

#côram# [#co(n)# + #ôs#], adv., _before one's eyes, in person_; prep.
with abl., _before, in the presence of_.

#corium, î#, n., _skin, hide_.

#Cornêlia, ae#, f., _Cornelia_.

  1. A daughter of P. Scipio Africanus Maior, and mother of the
  Gracchi.

  2. A daughter of L. Cornelius Cinna, first wife of Julius Caesar.

#Cornêlius, î#, m., the name of a very important Roman gens. See #Cinna,
Cossus, Lentulus, Scîpiô#, and #Sulla#.

#cornû, ûs#, n., _horn_; _wing_ (of an army).

#corôna, ae#, f., _a crown, garland_. See #cîvicus#.

#corpus, oris#, n., _a body_.

#corrigô#, see #regô#.

#corripiô#, see #rapiô#.

#corrumpô#, see #rumpô#.

#corruô#, see #ruô#.

#corvus, î#, m., _a raven_. In XVI. 3 it may be translated
_grappling-iron_, though the reference is rather to a wooden boarding
bridge, which swung freely round a pole in the prow of the ship. In
battle it was dropped upon the deck of a hostile vessel and held there
by a sharp iron spike in its under side.

#côs, côtis#, f., _flint stone, whetstone_.

#Cossus, î#, m., _A. Cornêlius_, consul in 343 B.C.

#cottîdiânus# [#cottîdiê#, _daily_], adj., _daily_; _usual, customary_;
_everyday, commonplace_.

#Crassus, î#, m., _M. Licinius_, called _Dîves_ because of his enormous
wealth; consul in 70 B.C., and triumvir with Caesar and Pompey in 60;
defeated and killed by the Parthians 53 B.C.

#crêber, bra, brum#, adj., _crowded, numerous, incessant_.

#crêdô, ere, crêdidî, crêditus#, _to lend, entrust to_; _believe in,
trust_; _believe, think_.

#Cremera, ae#, f., a river in Etruria, near Veii.

#cremô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to burn_.

#Cremôna, ae#, f., a town on the river Po.

#creô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to make, create_; _to choose, elect_.

  #re--recreô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to renew, revive, encourage_.

#crêscô, ere, crêvî, crêtus#, _to grow, increase_.

#in--incrêscô, ere, crêvî, --#, _to grow upon_; _grow, increase_.

#crîminor, ârî, âtus sum# [#crîmen#, _a charge_], _to complain of,
denounce_; with infin., _to charge_.

#crînis, is#, m., _hair_.

#cruciâtus, ûs# [#cruciô#], m., _torture, torment_.

#cruciô, âre, âvî, âtus# [#crux#], _to crucify, torture, torment_.

#crûdêlis, e#, adj., _cruel, unfeeling_.

#crûdêlitâs, âtis# [#crûdêlis#], f., _cruelty_.

#cruentus# [cf. #cruor#], adj., _blood-stained_.

#crumêna, ae#, f., _a purse, money bag_.

#cruor, ôris#, m., _running blood, gore_.

#crûs#, #crûris#, n., _a leg_.

#crux#, #crucis#, f., _cross, gallows_.

#crystallinus# [#crystallum#, _crystal_], adj., _of crystal_; as noun,
#crystallinum, î# (sc. #vâs#), n., _a vase of crystal_.

#cubiculum, î# [#cubô#], n., _a bedchamber_.

#cubô, âre, uî, itum#, _to lie down, recline_; _to lie sick_.

  #re--recubô, âre, --, --#, _to lie on one's back, lie, recline_.

#cûiâs, âtis#, interr. pron., _of what country? whence?_

#culpa, ae#, î., _fault, guilt_.

#cultellus, î# [dim. of #culter#], m., _a small knife_.

#culter, trî#, m., _knife, dagger_.

#cultus, ûs# [#colô#], m., _cultivation; refinement, luxury_; _mode of
living, style_.

#cum#, prep. with abl., _with, together with, at the same time with_. In
composition the forms #com, con#, and #co# are used, and denote
(1) accompaniment, (2) intensity.

#cum#, conj.; of time, _when, while, whenever_; of cause, _since_; of
concession, _although_; #cum . . . tum#, _both . . . and, not only . . .
but also_.

#*cumbô#, an old verb, same root as #cubô#.

  #ad--accumbô, ere, cubuî, cubitum#, _to lie or recline_ (esp. at
  table).

  #in--incumbô, ere, cubuî, cubitum#, _to lie or lean upon_; _devote
  one's self_.

  #ob--occumbô, ere, cubuî, cubitum#, _to fall_ (in death), _die_.

  #prô--prôcumbô, ere, cubuî, cubitum#, _to fall forward, fall
  prostrate_.

#cunctâtiô, ônis# [#cunctor#], f., _delay_.

#Cunctâtor, ôris# [#cunctor#], m., _Delayer_, a name given to Q. Fabius
Maximus.

#cunctor, ârî, âtus sum#, _to delay, linger_.

#cupidê# [#cupidus#], adv., _eagerly_.

#cupiditâs, âtis# [#cupidus#], f., _craving, desire, eagerness_.

#cupîdô, inis# [cf. #cupidus#], f., _desire, craving, greed_.

#cupidus# [#cupiô#], adj., _desirous, fond_; _greedy, covetous_.

#cupiô, ere, îvî (iî), îtus#, _to crave, desire, covet_.

#cûr#, adv., _why? for what reason?_

#cûra, ae#, f., _care, anxiety_.

#Curês, îum#, f. pl., a Sabine town.

#Cûria, ae#, f., _a curia, ward_, one of the ten divisions into which
each of the three orig. Roman tribes was divided; _council chamber_,
esp. the Roman _Senate-house_, either the _Cûria Hostîlia_, adjoining
the Forum on the north side, or the _Cûria Pompêia_, built by Pompey in
the Campus Martius. In the latter Caesar was murdered.

#Cûriâtius, î#, m., name of the three Alban brothers who fought with the
Horatii.

#Curius, î#, m., gentile name of _Mânius Curius Dentâtus_, a famous
Roman hero, renowned for his frugality and simplicity of life. He died
in 270 B.C.

#cûrô, âre, âvî, âtus# [#cûra#], _to care for, attend to_; with
gerundive and infin., _see to it that, take care that_.

  #prô--prôcûrô, âre, âvî, âtus#, to _care for, attend to_; of omens,
  _to avert by sacrifices_.

#currô, ere, cucurrî, cursum#, _to run_.

  #ad--accurrô, ere, (cu)currî, cursum#, _to run, to, hasten towards_.

  #con--concurrô, ere, (cu)currî, cursum#, _to run together_; _to rush
  together_ (in battle), _charge, fight_.

  #dê--dêcurrô, ere, (cu)curri, cursum#, _to run down, hasten down_.

  #dis--discurrô, ere, (cu)currî, cursum#, _to run in different
  directions_; _wander, roam_.

  #ob--occurrô, ere, (cu)currî, cursum#, _to run to meet, meet_;
  _withstand, oppose_.

  #sub--succurrô, ere, î, --#, _to run to, help, aid_.

#currus, ûs# [#currô#], m., _a chariot_.

#cursus, ûs# [#currô#], m., _running_; _journey, passage, course_;
_speed_.

#curûlis, e# [#currus#], adj., _of a chariot_. #Sella curûlis#, see
#sella#.

#cûstôdia, ae# [#cûstôs#], f., _watching_; _guard-house, prison_; pl.,
_pickets, watchmen_.

#cûstôdiô, îre, îvî, îtus# [#cûstôs#], _to watch, guard, defend_.

#cûstôs, ôdis#, m. and f., _guardian, protector_.

#Cy:rus, î#, m., Cyrus the Great, 559-529 B.C., founder of the Persian
empire.


#D#

#D.#, abbreviation of the name #Decimus#.

#Dâcî, ôrum#, m. pl., _the Dacians_, a people living on the north of the
Danube.

#damnâtiô, ônis# [#damnô#], f., _condemnation_.

#damnô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to judge guilty, condemn_; #capite damnâre#,
_to condemn to death_.

  #con--condemnô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to find guilty, condemn,
  sentence_.

#dê#, prep, with abl.; of place, _from, down from, out of_; of time,
_after, during_; of cause, _in consequence of, through_; of relation,
_concerning, in respect to_. In compounds it generally denotes
thoroughness, but occasionally has negative force.

#dea, ae#, f., _a goddess_.

#deambulô#, see #ambulô#.

#dêbeô#, see #habeô#.

#dêbilis# [#dê# + #habilis#], adj., _weak, disabled, helpless_.

#dêcêdô#, see #cêdô#.

#decem#, indecl. num. adj., _ten_.

#december, bris, bre#, adj., _tenth_; as noun, #December#
(sc. #mênsis#), m., _December, the tenth month_ (counting from March,
with which the Roman year originally began).

#decemvir, î# [#decem# + #vir#], m., _a member of a commission of ten
men, a decemvir_.

#dêcernô#, see #cernô#.

#decet, êre, uit#, impers., _it is fitting_.

#decimus# [#decem#], num. adj., _tenth_.

#Decimus, î#, m., a Roman praenomen.

#dêcipiô#, see #capiô#.

#Decius, î#, m., the gentile name of _P. Decius Mûs_, consul B.C. 340.

#dêclârô, âre, âvî, âtus# [#dê# + #clârus#], _to make clear, disclose_;
_show, declare_.

#decorô, âre, âvî, âtus# [#decus#], _to adorn, deck_.

#dêcurrô#, see #currô#.

#decus, oris#, n., _grace, glory, honor, splendor, ornament_.

#dêcutiô#, see #quatiô#.

#dêditîcius, î# [#dêditus#], m., _a captive_.

#dêditiô, ônis# [#dêdô#], f., _a surrender_.

#dêditus# [orig. part. of #dêdô#], adj., _surrendered_; #devoted to,
addicted to#. As noun, #dêditus, î#, m., _a captive_.

#dêdô#, see #dô#.

#dêdûcô#, see #dûcô#.

#dêfatîgâtiô, ônis#, f., _weariness_.

#dêfendô#, see #*fendô#.

#dêfênsiô, ônis# [#dêfendô#], f., _a defense_.

#dêfênsor, ôris# [#dêfendô#], m., _a defender_.

#dêferô#, see #ferô#.

#dêfessus#, adj., _worn out, weary_.

#dêficiô#, see #faciô#.

#dêfîgô#, see #fîgô#.

#deflectô#, see #flectô#.

#dêfôrmitâs, âtis# [#dêfôrmis#, _ugly_], f., _ugliness, disfigurement_.

#dêfungor#, see #fungor#.

#dêgô#, see #agô#.

#dêhonestô, âre, --, --# [#dê# + #honestô# (cf. #honôs#), _to honor_],
_to disgrace, dishonor_.

#dêiciô#, see #iaciô#.

#dein#, see #deinde#.

#deinceps#, adv., _one after the other, in succession_; _next_;
_thereafter, in the future_.

#deinde# or #dein# [#dê# + #inde#], adv., _subsequently_; _then, next_;
_thereafter, from that time on_.

#dêlâbor#, see #lâbor#.

#dêlêctô, âre, âvi, âtus# [#dê# + #laciô#], to _delight, please,
entertain_.

#dêlêctus# [orig. part. of (1) #dêligô#], adj., _picked, choice_.

#dêlêctus, ûs# [(1) #dêligô#], m., _a picking out, a levy, draft_;
#dêlêctum agere# or #habêre#, _to hold a levy_.

#dêleô, êre, êvî, êtus#, _to blot out, destroy_.

#dêlîberâbundus# [#dêlîberô#], adj., _pondering, reflecting_.

#dêlîberô, âre, âvî, âtus# [#dê# + #lîbra#, _a balance_], _to weigh_
(consider) _well, deliberate, ponder_.

#dêlicâtê# [#dêlicâtus#], adv., _luxuriously, effeminately_.

#dêlicâtus# [cf. #dêliciae#], adj., _devoted to pleasure, luxurious,
effeminate_.

#dêliciae, ârum#, pl. f., _delights, pleasure, luxury_.

(1) #dêligô#, see #legô#.

(2) #dêligô, âre#, see #ligô#.

#delîrô, âre, --, --# [#dê# + #lîra#, _a furrow_], _to be crazy_.

#dêlitêscô, ere, lituî, --# [#dê# + #lateô#, _to hide_], _lie hid, be
concealed_.

#Delphi, ôrum#, pl. m., _Delphi_, a town of Phocis in Central Greece,
renowned for its oracle of Apollo.

#dêmissê# [#dêmissus#, _modest_], adv., _modestly, humbly, abjectly_.

#dêmittô#, see #mittô#.

#dêmoror#, see #moror#.

#dêmum#, adv., _at last, finally_; #tum dêmum#, _then at last, not till
then_.

#dênârius, î#, m., a silver coin, equivalent orig. to 10, afterwards to
16, asses. Its value varied from 16 to 20 cents.

#dênegô#, see #negô#.

#dênique#, adv., _thereafter, thereupon_; _at last, finally_; _briefly,
in short_.

#dênûntiô#, see #nûntiô#.

#dênuô# [#dê# + #novô#], adv., _anew, again_.

#deôsculor#, see #ôsculor#.

#dêpellô#, see #pellô#.

#dêpereô#, see #pereô#.

#dêpônô#, see #pônô#.

#dêpôscô#, see #pôscô#.

#dêprecor#, see #precor#.

#dêprehendô#, see #prehendô#.

#dêrîdeô#, see #rîdeô#.

#dêscendô#, see #scandô#.

#dêscîscô#, see #scîscô#.

#dêscrîbô#, see #scrîbô#.

#dêserô#, see #serô#.

#dêsîderium, î# [#dêsîderô#], n., _longing, yearning_; _regret_.

#dêsîderô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to long for_; _require, need_.

#dêsiliô#, see #saliô#.

#dêsipiêns, entis# [orig. part. of #dêsipiô#], adj., _foolish, silly_.
As noun, #dêsipiêns, entis#, m., _a fool, madman_.

#dêsipiô#, see #sapiô#.

#dêsistô#, see #sistô#.

#dêspêrâtiô, ônis# [#dêspêrô#], f., _despair, desperation_.

#dêspêrô#, see #spêrô#.

#dêspiciô#, see #*speciô#.

#dêspondeô#, see #spondeô#.

#dêstinô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to make fast, fix_; _resolve, design, plan_.

#dêstringô#, see #stringô#.

#dêsum#, see #sum#.

#dêsuper# [#dê# + #super#], adv., _from above_.

#dêtegô#, see #tegô#.

#dêterreô#, see #terreô#.

#dêtineô#, see #teneô#.

#dêtrahô#, see #trahô#.

#dêtrêctô, âre, âvî, âtus# [#dê# neg. + #trâctô#, _to handle, manage_],
_to decline, shirk_.

#dêtrîmentum, î# [#dêterô#, _to rub away_], n., _loss, damage_.

#deûrô#, see #ûrô#.

#deus, î#, m., _a god, divinity_.

#dêvincô#, see #vincô#.

#dêvolô#, see (2) #volô#.

#dêvoveô#, see #voveô#.

#dexter, era, erum#, and #tra, trum#, adj., _right_. As noun, #dextra#
(sc. #manus#), f., _the right hand_.

#diadêma, atis#, n., _a royal crown, diadem_.

#Diâna, ae#, f., an ancient Italian goddess, identified by the Romans
with the Greek Artemis, goddess of the moon and the chase.

#dîcô, ere, dîxî, dictus#, _to say, speak_; _call, name_; _appoint_;
#causam dîcere#, _to plead a case_; #diem dîcere alicuî#, _to bring a
complaint against some one_; #iûs dîcere#, _to administer justice, hold
court_; #multam dîcere#, _to impose a fine_.

  #ad--addîcô, ere, dîxî, dictus#, _to be propitious to, assent_;
  with acc., _to adjudge, award_.

  #ê--êdîcô, ere, dîxî, dictus#, _to make known, proclaim_; _order,
  command_; #diem êdîcere#, _to set a day_ (by public proclamation).

  #in--indîcô, ere, dîxî, dictus#, _to proclaim, announce_; _appoint_;
  _impose, inflict_.

  #inter--interdîcô, ere, dîxî, dictum#, _to forbid, prohibit,
  exclude_.

  #prae--praedîcô, ere, dîxî, dictus#, _to foretell, prophesy_; _warn,
  admonish_.

#dicô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to declare_; _dedicate, consecrate_.

  #ab--abdicô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to disown, reject_; #sê abdicâre#,
  _to resign_.

  #in--indicô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to make known, reveal_.

  #prae--praedicô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to say openly, assert, declare_.

#dictâtor, ôris# [#dictô#, _to order_], m., _a dictator_, a magistrate
usually appointed only in times of extreme peril. He was named by one of
the consuls, after the senate had declared the appointment of a dictator
necessary. He held unlimited powers, but the term of his office was
limited to six months.

#dictâtûra, ae# [#dictâtor#], f., _dictatorship_.

#dictitô, âre, âvî, âtus# [freq. of #dîcô#], _to say often, assert,
insist_.

#dictum, î# [#dîcô#], n., _saying, word, remark_; _command_.

#dîdûcô#, see #dûcô#.

#diês, êî#, m. and (sometimes in sing.) f., _a day_; #in diês#, _from
day to day_.

#diffîdô, ere, fîsus sum# [#dis# neg. + #fîdô#, _to trust_], _to
distrust, doubt_.

#diffluô#, see #fluô#.

#dîgnitâs, âtis# [#dîgnus#], f., _worth, high character_; _eminence,
rank, reputation_.

#dîgnus#, adj., _worthy, deserving of_.

#dîgredior#, see #gradior#.

#dîligenter# [#dîligô#], adv., _industriously, diligently_.

#dîligentia, ae# [#dîligô#], f., _carefulness, diligence, industry_.

#dîligô#, see #legô#.

#dîlûcêscô, ere, lûxî, --# [cf. #lûx#], _to grow light, dawn_.

#dîmicâtiô, ônis# [#dîmicô#], f., _a fight_.

#dîmicô, âre, âvî, âtum#, _to fight_.

#dîmittô#, see #mittô#.

#dîrigô#, see #regô#.

#dîrimô#, see #emô#.

#dîripiô#, see #rapiô#.

#dîruô#, see #ruô#.

#dîs, dîtis#, comp. #dîtior#, sup. #dîtissimus#, adj., _rich, wealthy_.

#dis# or #dî#, inseparable prefix, _apart, asunder_; sometimes negative,
_not_.

#discêdô#, see #cêdô#.

#discerpô#, see #carpô#.

#dîsciplîna, ae# [#dîscô#], f., _teaching, training, discipline_.

#dîscipulus, î# [#dîscô#], m., _a pupil_.

#dîscô, ere, didicî, --#, _to learn_.

#dîscrîbô#, see #scrîbô#.

#discrîmen, inis# [#discernô#, _to divide_], n., _difference_;
_turning-point, decision_; _peril, crisis_.

#discurrô#, see #currô#.

#disertus# [#disserô#], adj., _eloquent_.

#dispênsâtor, ôris# [#dispênsô#, _to manage_], m., _manager, steward,
treasurer_.

#dîspiciô#, see #*speciô#.

#displiceô#, see #placeô#.

#dispônô#, see #pônô#.

#disputô#, see #putô#.

#dissênsiô, ônis# [#dissentiô#, _to disagree_], f., _disagreement,
strife_.

#disserô#, see #serô#.

#dissimilis, e# [#dis# neg. + #similis#], adj., _unlike_.

#dissimulô#, see #simulô#.

#dissipô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to scatter, squander, dissipate_.

#dissuâdeô#, see #suâdeô#.

#distrahô#, see #trahô#.

#distribuô#, see #tribuô#.

#dîtior, dîtissimus#, see #dîs#.

#dîtô, âre, âvî, âtus# [#dîs#], _to enrich_.

#diû#, adv., _for a long time, long_.

#diuturnus# [#diû#], adj., _prolonged, long_.

#dîversus# [#dîvertô#], adj., _turned different ways, opposite,
contrary_; #in dîversa#, _apart, asunder_.

#dîvertô#, see #vertô#.

#dîvidô, ere, vîsî, vîsus#, _to divide, separate, distribute_.

#dîvînitus# [#dîvînus#], adv., _by divine agency, providentially_.

#dîvînus# [#dîvus#], adj., _godlike, divine_.

#dîvitiae, ârum# [#dives#, _rich_], pl. f., _wealth_.

#dîvus#, adj., _godlike, deified_; often applied to the Roman emperors
after death.

#dô, dare, dedî, datus#, _to put, place_; _give, present, entrust_;
#operam dare#, _to pay attention_; #poenâs dare#, _to suffer
punishment_.

  #ab--abdô, dere, didî, ditus#, _to put away, hide, conceal_.

  #ad--addô, dere, didî, ditus#, _to put or join to, add_.

  #circumdô, dere, didî, ditus#, _to place around, surround, enclose_.

  #con--condô, dere, didî, ditus#, _to put together, found, build_;
  _put away, hide_; _sheathe_ (a sword).

  #dê--dêdô, dere, didî, ditus#, _to give up, surrender_.

  #ex--êdô, dere, didî, ditus#, _to give out, give_; _give birth to,
  bear_; _publish, announce, reveal_; _perform_; #lûdôs êdere#, _to
  celebrate games_.

  #in--indô, dere, didî, ditus#, _to put in or on, give, confer_.

  #per--perdô, dere, didî, ditus#, _to lose, destroy, ruin, waste_.

  #prô--prôdô, dere, didî, ditus#, _to give_ or _put forth, make
  known_; _hand down, record_; _betray_.

  #re--reddô, dere, didî, ditus#, _to give back, restore, return_;
  _deliver_ (a letter); _render_.

  #sub--subdô, dere, didî, ditus#, _to put under, apply_.

  #trâns--trâdô, dere, didî, ditus#, _to give over, give up,
  surrender_; _hand down, report, relate_; _hand over, entrust_.

#doceô, êre, uî, tus#, _to teach, point out_.

  #ê--êdoceô, êre, uî, tus#, _to teach thoroughly_.

#doctor, ôris# [#doceô#], m., _teacher_.

#doctrîna, ae# [#doceô#], f., _instruction_; _learning, training_.

#doctus# [orig. part. of #doceô#], adj., _educated, learned, skilled_.

#dolor, ôris# [#doleô#, _to feel pain_], m., _pain, grief, resentment_.

#dolôsê# [#dolus#], adv., _craftily_.

#dolus, î#, m., _craft, trickery_.

#domicilium, î# [#domus#], n., _dwelling_.

#dominâtiô, ônis# [#dominor#], f., _rule, supremacy, dominion_.

#dominâtus, ûs# [#dominor#, _to rule_], m., _rule, sway, mastery,
command_.

#dominus, î#, m., #master# (esp. of slaves), _ruler, lord_.

#domô, âre, uî, itus#, _to tame, subdue_.

#domus, ûs#, f., _a house, home_; loc. #domî#, _at home_; acc. #domum#,
_homewards, home_.

#dônâtîvum, î# [#dônô#], n., _a gift_.

#dônec#, conj., _while, until, as long as_.

#dônô, âre, âvî, âtus# [#dônum#], _to give, present_.

#dônum, î# [#dô#], n., _a gift, present_.

#dormiô, îre, îvî, --#, _to sleep_.

#dorsum, î#, n., _back_ (of an animal); _range_ or _ridge_ (of a
mountain).

#dôs, dôtis# [#dô#], f., _dowry_.

#dôtâlis, e# [#dôs#], adj., of a dowry; #dôtâlia dôna#, _wedding
presents_.

#dubitô, âre, âvî, âtum# [#dubius#], _to doubt, waver, hesitate_.

#dubius#, adj., _doubtful, uncertain_; #in dubium vocâre#, _to call in
question_.

#ducentî, ae, a# [#duo# + #centum#], num. adj., _two hundred_.

#dûcô, ere, dûxî, ductus#, _to lead_; _prolong_; _consider, reckon_;
#fossam dûcere#, _to build a ditch_; #fûnus dûcere#, _to celebrate a
funeral_; #uxôrem dûcere#, _to marry_.

  #ab--abdûcô, ere, dûxî, ductus#, _to lead off_ or _away, drag off,
  remove_.

  #ad--addûcô, ere, dûxî, ductus#, _to lead to, bring_; _induce,
  influence_.

  #con--condûcô, ere, dûxî, ductus#, _to bring together_; _contribute
  to, serve_.

  #dê--dêdûcô, ere, dûxî, ductus#, _to lead_ (away); _attend, escort_.

  #dis--dîdûcô, ere, dûxî, ductus#, _to lead_ or _draw apart,
  separate, open_.

  #ê--êdûcô, ere, dûxî, ductus#, _to lead forth_ or _out_; _bring up,
  rear_.

  #in--indûcô, ere, dûxî, ductus#, _to lead_ or _bring in, introduce_;
  _lead, induce, influence_.

  #intrô--intrôdûcô, ere, dûxî, ductus#, _to lead_ or _bring in, usher
  in, admit_.

  #per--perdûcô, ere, dûxî, ductus#, _to lead, conduct, escort_;
  _pursue_; _spend, pass_.

  #re--redûcô, ere, dûxî, ductus#, _to lead_ or _escort back,
  accompany_.

  #sê--sêdûcô, ere, dûxî, ductus#, _to lead apart_ or _aside_.

  #sub--subdûcô, ere, dûxî, ductus#, _to lead_ or _draw away_
  (secretly), _withdraw, remove_; _hide_.

  #trâns--trâdûcô, ere, dûxî, ductus#, _to lead_ or _carry across,
  transport_; _spend, pass_ (time).

#dûdum#, adv., _a while ago_. See #iam#.

#Duîlius, î#, m., _C._, a Roman general who defeated the Carthaginians
in a naval battle, 260 B.C.

(1) #dum#, adverbial particle found only in compounds, _a while_; with
negatives, _yet_.

(2) #dum#, conj., _while, until_.

#dummodo# [#dum# + #modo#], conj., _provided_.

#duo, ae, o#, num. adj., _two_.

#duodecim# [#duo# + #decem#], num. adj., _twelve_.

#duodênî, ae, a#, adj., _twelve each, twelve_.

#duplex, icis# [#duo# + #plicô#, _to fold_], adj., _twofold, double_.

#duplicô, âre, âvî, âtus# [#duplex#], _to double, repeat_.

#dûrô, âre, âvî, âtus# [#dûrus#], _to harden_; _endure, hold out, last_.

#dûrus#, adj., _hard, rough_; _rude, uncultivated_; _unfeeling_.

#dux, ducis# [#dûcô#], m., _leader, guide_; _commander, general_.

#Dy:rrachium, î#, n., a town in Illyria, on the east coast of the
Adriatic, nearly opposite Brundisium.


#E#

#ê#, see #ex#.

#ecquid#, interr. adv., used (1) to emphasize a direct question, _at
all?_ (2) in indir. question, _whether_.

#êdîcô#, see #dîcô#.

#êdictum, î# [#êdîcô#], n., _proclamation, edict_.

#êditus# [orig. part. of #êdô#], adj., _high_.

#edô, ere (êsse), êsî, êsus#, _to eat, consume_.

#êdô#, see #dô#.

#êdoceô#, see #doceô#.

#êducâtiô, ônis# [#êducô#], f., _training, education_.

#êdûcô#, see #dûcô#.

#êducô, âre, âvî, âtus# [#êdûcô#], _to bring up, rear, train, educate_.

#effêminâtus# [orig. part. of #effêminô#, _to make womanish_], adj.,
_womanish_.

(1) #efferô#, see #ferô#.

(2) #efferô, âre, âvî, âtus# [#ex# + #ferus#], _to render wild_ or
_savage_; _madden_.

#efficiô#, see #faciô#.

#efflâgitô#, see #flâgitô#.

#effugiô#, see #fugiô#.

#effundô#, see #fundô#.

#egeô, êre, uî, --#, _to be lacking_; _to be poor_ or _in need_.

#Egeria, ae#, f., the nymph from whom King Numa received revelations.

#ego, meî#, pers. pron., _I_; pl., #nôs#, _we_.

#êgredior#, see #gradior#.

#êgregiê# [#êgregius#], adv., _excellently, exceedingly, strikingly_.

#êgregius# [#ê# + #grex#], adj., _select, distinguished, excellent_.

#êiciô#, see #iaciô#.

#êlâbor#, see #lâbor#.

#êlabôrô#, see #labôrô#.

#êlanguêscô, ere, êlanguî, --#, _to grow faint_ or _feeble_; _slacken,
abate_.

#êlâtus# [orig. part. of (1) #efferô#], adj., _high_; _elated, exalted,
puffed up_.

#êleganter# [#êlegâns#, _choice_], adv., _with good judgment,
judiciously_.

#êlegantia, ae# [#êlegâns#, _choice_], f., _taste, refinement, elegance,
grace_.

#elephantus, î#, m., _the elephant_.

#êliciô#, see #*laciô#.

#êlîdô#, see #laedô#.

#êligô#, see #legô#.

#êloquentia, ae# [#êloquor#, _to speak_], f., _eloquence_.

#êmineô, êre, uî, --#, _to stand out, tower up_.

#êmittô#, see #mittô#.

#emô, ere, êmî, êmptus#, _to take_; _buy, purchase_; _gain, acquire_.

  #con--cômô, ere, cômpsî, cômptus#, _to bring together, arrange,
  dress_ (the hair), _comb_.

  #dis--dîrimô, ere, êmî, êmptus#, _to take apart, separate_; #rês
  dîrimere#, _to adjust matters_.

  #ex--eximo, ere, êmî, êmptus#, _to take out, remove_; _free,
  release_.

  #inter--interimô, ere, êmî, êmptus#, _to take from the midst_
  (of men), _kill_.

  #re--redimô, ere, êmî, êmptus#, _to buy back, ransom_; _replace_.

#ên#, interj., _lo! behold! see!_

#enim#, conj., always postpositive, _namely, in fact, you know_; _for,
because_.

#êniteô#, see #niteô#.

#ênîtor#, see #nîtor#.

#ênsis, is#, m., _a sword_.

(1) #eô, îre, îvî (iî), itûrus#, _to go_ or _come, walk, march_.

#ab--abeô, îre, îvî (iî), itûrus#, _to go away, depart_; #abîre in#,
_pass into, change into_.

#ad--adeô, îre, îvî (iî), itus#, _to go_ or _come to, approach, visit_.

#ante--anteeô, îre, îvî (iî), --#, _to go before_.

#dê# + #per--dêpereô, îre, îvî (iî), itûrus#, _to die, perish_.

#ex--exeô, îre, îvî (iî), itûrus#, _to go_ or _come forth_; _retire_.

#in--ineô, îre, îvî (iî), itus#, _to enter, begin_; #cônsilium inîre#,
_to form a plan_.

#inter--intereô, îre, îvî (iî), itûrus#, _to perish, die_.

#intrô--introeô, îre, îvî (iî), itûrus#, _to enter_.

#ob--obeô, îre, îvî (iî), itus#, _to go to meet_; _perform_; _perish,
die_.

#per--pereô, îre, îvî (iî), itûrus#, _to perish, disappear, die_.

#praeter--praetereô, îre, îvî (iî), itus#, _to go_ or _pass by_; _omit_.

#re--redeô, îre, îvî (iî), itûrus#, _to go_ or _come back, return_.

#sub--subeô, îre, îvî (iî), itus#, _to come_ or _go up to, go under,
encounter, face_ (danger); #venênum subit#, _the poison spreads_.

#trâns--transeô, îre, îvî (iî), itus#, _to cross_ (over); _pass by_.

(2) #eô# [#is#], adv., _for that reason, therefore_; _to that place,
thither_; _to that degree, so far_.

#Ephesius#, adj., _Ephesian_.

#Ephesus, î#, f., a Greek city on the west coast of Asia Minor.

#epigramma, atis#, n., _epigram, poem_.

#Êpîrus, î#, f., a country on the Ionian Sea, northwest of Greece
proper.

#epistula, ae#, f., _a letter_.

#epulor, ârî, âtus sum# [#epulum#], _to feast_.

#epulum, î#, n. (pl., #epulae, ârum#, f.), _a feast, banquet_.

#eques, itis# [#equus#], m., _a horseman, cavalryman_; _knight_, or
member of the equestrian order. The three centuries of knights
established by Romulus formed the cavalry of the Roman army. Later, the
number was increased to 1800, to each of whom a horse was furnished by
the state, together with an allowance for its keep. Later, the term
_equitês_ included not only those who actually served in the army, but
also those who possessed a certain fortune, which in the time of
Augustus was set at about $15,000.

#equester, tris, tre# [#equus#], adj., _of the knights, knightly_.

#equitô, âre, âvî, --# [#equus#], _to ride_.

  #ad--adequitô, âre, âvî, --#, _to ride to, ride up_.

#equus, î#, m., _a horse_.

#êrêctus# [orig. part. of #êrigô#], adj., _upright, erect_.

#ergâ#, prep. with acc., _towards, to, with respect to_.

#ergô#, adv., expressing an inference, like _now, well, then,
therefore_.

#êrigô#, see #regô#.

#error, ôris# [#errô#, _to wander_], m., _wandering, error, mistake_.

#êrubêscô, ere, êrubuî, --#, _to grow red, blush_; _feel ashamed_.

#êrudiô, îre, îvî, îtus# [#ê# + #rudis#], _to polish, educate, train_.

#êrumpô#, see #rumpô#.

#êruô#, see #ruô#.

#êsca, ae# [#edô#], f., _food, bait_.

#êscendô#, see #scandô#.

#Êsquilînus, î#, m. (sc. #collis#), _the Esquiline Hill_, the largest of
the seven hills of Rome.

#et#, (1) adv., _also, too, even_; (2) conj., _and, and yet, but_; #et
. . . et#, _both . . . and_.

#etiam# [#et# + #iam#], adv. and conj., _and also, also, even_.

#Etrûria, ae#, f., the country of the Etruscans, northwest of Latium.

#Etrûscî, ôrum#, pl. m., _the Etruscans_, the people of Etruria.

#etsî# [#et# + #sî#], conj., _even if, although_.

#Eurîpidês, is#, m., a Greek tragic poet of the fifth century B.C.

#Eurôpa, ae#, f., _Europe_.

#êvâdô#, see #vâdô#.

#êvehô#, see #vehô#.

#êventus, ûs# [#êveniô#, _to come out_], m., _outcome, result_;
_occurrence, event_.

#êvertô#, see #vertô#.

#êvocô#, see #vocô#.

#ex#, before consonants often #ê#, prep. with abl.; of place, _out of_
(the midst of), _from_; of cause, _in consequence of, because of_;
_according to_; in compounds, _forth, out_; _thoroughly_; _not_.

#exâctor, ôris# [#exigô#, _to exact_], m., _exactor, enforcer_.

#exâminô, âre, âvî, âtus# [#exâmen#, _means of weighing_], _to weigh,
examine, compare_.

#exanimô, âre, âvî, âtus# [#ex# + #anima#], _to put out of breath,
kill_.

#exârdêscô, ere, ârsî, --# [#ex# + #ârdêscô#, intens. of #ârdeô#, _to
burn, glow_], _to blaze forth_.

#exarô, âre, âvî, âtus# [#ex# + #arô#, _to plow_], _to scratch off,
compose_.

#exasperô, âre, âvî, âtus# [#ex# + #asper#], _to roughen, irritate,
provoke_.

#exaudiô#, see #audiô#.

#excelsus#, adj., _lofty, high_; as noun, #excelsum, î#, n., _elevated
station_.

#excerpô#, see #carpô#.

#excidium, î#, n., _downfall, ruin_.

#excipiô#, see #capiô#.

#excitô#, see #citô#.

#exclâmô#, see #clâmô#.

#exclûdô#, see #claudô#.

#excôgitô#, see #agitô#.

#excolô#, see #colô#.

#excubiae, ârum# [#ex# + #cubô#], pl. f., _a lying out on guard_; _the
watch, watchmen_.

#excûsâtiô, ônis# [#excûsô#], f., _excuse_.

#excûsô, âre, âvî, âtus# [#ex# + #causa#], _to free from trial, excuse_.

#excutiô#, see #quatiô#.

#exemplum, î# [#eximô#], n., _specimen, example, precedent, warning_.

#exeô#, see (1) #eô#.

#exerceô#, see #arceô#.

#exercitus, ûs# [#exerceô#], m., _an army_.

#exhauriô#, see #hauriô#.

#exhibeô#, see #habeô#.

#exhorrêscô, ere, horruî, --#, _to shudder at, shrink from_.

#exigô#, see #agô#.

#exiguus# [#exigô#, _to weigh exactly_], adj., _scanty, short, brief_.

#eximius# [#eximô#], adj., _choice, distinguished, remarkable,
excellent_.

#eximô#, see #emô#.

#exîstimô, âre, âvî, âtus# [#ex# + #aestimô#, _to value_], _to value_;
_think, believe_.

#exitium, î# [#exeô#], n., _destruction, ruin, death_.

#exitus, ûs# [#exeô#], m., _outcome, close_; _departure_; _end of life,
death_.

#exorior#, see #orior#.

#expediô, îre, îvî (iî), îtus# [#ex# + #pês#], _to set free, extricate_;
_procure, obtain_.

#expellô#, see #pellô#.

#expendô#, see #pendô#.

#experîmentum, î# [#experior#], n., _proof, test, trial_.

#experior, îrî, tus sum#, _to test, try_; _find out, learn, experience_.

#expetô#, see #petô#.

#expîlô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to plunder, rob_.

#expiô, âre, âvî, âtus# [#ex# + #piô#, _to appease_], _to make amends
for, atone for_.

#expleô#, see #*pleô#.

#explôrô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to reconnoiter_.

#expônô#, see #pônô#.

#expôscô#, see #pôscô#.

#expositiô, ônis# [#expônô#], f., _exposure_.

#exprimô#, see #premô#.

#expûgnâtiô, ônis# [#expûgnô#], f., #a taking by storm, storming,
capture#.

#expûgnô#, see #pûgnô#.

#exquîsîtus# [#exquîrô#, _to seek out_], adj., _carefully sought out,
special_.

#exsecrô#, see #sacrô#.

#exsequiae, ârum# [#ex# + #sequor#], pl. f., _funeral procession,
funeral_.

#exserô#, see #serô#.

#exsilium, î#, n., _banishment, exile_.

#exsistô#, see #sistô#.

#exspectâtiô, ônis# [#exspectô#], f., _expectation, anticipation_.

#exspectô#, see #spectô#.

#exspîrô#, see #spîrô#.

#exstinguô#, see #stinguô#.

#exstô#, see #stô#.

#exstruô#, see #struô#.

#exsultô#, see #saltô#.

#extemplô# [#ex# + dim. of #tempus#], adv., _on the instant, at once,
forthwith_.

#exter# or #exterus, tera, terum#, adj., _outer, foreign_; comp.
#exterior#; sup. #extrêmus#, _outermost, extreme_; _last, furthermost_;
_last part of_.

#extimêscô, ere, timuî, --# [#ex# + #*timêscô#, inceptive of #timeô#],
_to fear_ or _dread greatly_.

#extrâ# [#exter#], (1) adv., _on the outside, without_; (2) prep, with
acc., _outside of, beyond_.

#extrahô#, see #trahô#.

#extraôrdinârius# [#extrâ# + #ôrdô#], adj., _out of the common run,
uncommon_.

#extrêmus#, see #exter#.

#exuô, ere, î, ûtus#, _to draw or pull off, lay aside_; _strip,
despoil_.

#exûrô#, see #ûrô#.


#F#

#faber, fabrî#, m., _a workman_ (in hard materials), _smith, carpenter_.

#Fabius, î#, m., the name of a famous Roman gens. See #Mâximus#.

#fabricô, âre, âvî, âtus# [cf. #faber#], _to make, build, construct_.

#fâbula, ae# [#for#, _to speak_], f., _story, play_.

#facêtê# [#facêtus#, _witty_], adv., #wittily#.

#facile# [#facilis#], adv., _easily_; _readily, willingly_.

#facilis, e# [#faciô#], adj., _easy_.

#facinus, oris# [#faciô#], n., _a deed_; _crime_.

#faciô, facere, fêcî, factus#, _to make, do, perform_; _choose,
appoint_; #stîpendia facere#, _to serve a campaign_; #sûmptum facere#,
_to spend_; #verba facere#, _to speak_; #vim facere#, _to use violence_;
pass., #fîô, fierî, factus sum#, _to be done, occur, take place,
happen_.

  #ad--adficiô, ere, fêcî, fectus#, _to do something to, affect_;
  _treat, visit with_.

  #con--cônficiô, ere, fêcî, fectus#, _to do thoroughly_; _complete,
  prepare_; _accomplish, make_; _exhaust, kill_.

  #dê--dêficiô, ere, fêcî, fectum#, _withdraw, revolt_; _fail,
  disappear, give out_.

  #ex--efficiô, ere, fêcî, fectus#, _to work out, bring to pass,
  accomplish_; _make, render, cause, effect_.

  #in--înficiô, ere, fêcî, fectus#, _to stain, dye_; _pollute, taint_.

  #inter--interficiô, ere, fêcî, fectus#, _to kill_; _murder_.

  #per--perficiô, ere, fêcî, fectus#, _to do thoroughly, execute,
  accomplish_.

  #sub--sufficiô, ere, fêcî, fectus#, _to put under_, or _in place of,
  appoint as successor, substitute_; intrans., _suffice, be
  sufficient_.

#factiô, ônis# [#faciô#], f., _party, faction_.

#factum, î# [#faciô#], n., _a deed, act_.

#facultâs, âtis# [#facilis#], f., _means, opportunity_; _ability,
skill_.

#fâcundia, ae# [#fâcundus#, _eloquent_], f., _eloquence, oratory_.

#Falernus#, adj., _Falernian_; #ager Falernus#, _a famous wine-growing
district in Campania_.

#fâma, ae# [#for#, _to speak_], f., _talk, report, rumor_; _tradition_;
_fame, reputation_.

#famês, is#, f., #hunger#.

#familia, ae# [#famulus#, _a slave_], f., _the slaves in a household_;
_family, house, race_.

#familiâris, e# [#familia#], adj., _belonging to a household, private,
intimate, friendly_; _well-known_; #rês familiâris#, _private property_.
As noun, m., _an intimate friend_.

#familiâritâs, âtis# [#familiâris#], f., _friendship, intimacy_.

#fâmôsus# [#fâma#], adj., _famous_; _notorious_; _scurrilous,
slanderous_.

#famula, ae#, f., _a slave-woman_.

#fânum, î#, n., _a shrine, temple_.

#fascis, is#, m., _a bundle_; pl., _the fasces_, a bundle of rods
carried by the lictors before various magistrates. Outside of Rome an
axe was bound with the rods. The rods and axe were typical of the
magistrate's power to punish, even to the extent of inflicting the death
penalty. See #lîctor#.

#fâstî, ôrum# [#fâstus#], pl. m., _a register_, esp. of business days,
also of officers, triumphs, etc.; _the calendar_.

#fâstus# [#fâs#, _right_], adj., _not forbidden, legal_; #diês fâstus#,
a day on which it was legal to hold court, a business day.

#fâtâlis, e# [#fâtum#, _fate_], adj., _fateful, fatal_.

#fateor, êrî, fassus sum#, _to confess_.

  #con--cônfiteor, êrî, fessus sum#, _to confess freely, acknowledge,
  avow_.

  #prô--profiteor, êrî, fessus sum#, _to declare publicly, avow_;
  #nômen profitêrî#, _to avow one's self a candidate_.

#faucês, ium#, pl. f., _throat_.

#Faustulus, î#, m., the shepherd who brought up Romulus and Remus.

#Faustus, î# [#faveô#], m., _the Lucky_, a name given by Sulla to his
son.

#Fausta, ae# [#faveô#], f., _the Lucky_, a name given by Sulla to his
daughter.

#faveô, êre, fâvî, fautûrus#, _to favor, support_.

#favor, ôris# [#faveô#], m., _favor, good will_.

#fax, facis#, f., _torch, firebrand_.

#fêlîcitâs, âtis# [#fêlîx#], f., _good fortune, luck, happiness_.

#fêlîx, îcis#, adj., _lucky, fortunate, happy_. As noun, m., cognomen of
#Sulla#.

#fêmina, ae#, f., _a woman, female_.

#femur, femoris#, n., _the thigh_.

#*fendô, ere#, _to strike_.

  #dê--dêfendô, ere, î, fênsus#, _to ward off, repel_; _defend,
  protect_.

  #ob--offendô, ere, î, fênsus#, _to strike against, displease, vex_.

#ferê#, adv., _almost, about_ (esp. with numbers).

#feriô, îre, percussî, percussus#, _to strike_.

#fermê# [for #ferimê#, sup. of #ferê#], adv., _almost, about_ (esp. with
numbers).

#ferô, ferre, tulî, lâtus#, _to bear, carry, take_; _bear, endure,
suffer_; _say, report, tell_; pass., _to be borne, rush_; #aegrê,
indîgnê# or #molestê ferre#, _to take amiss_; #lêgem ferre#, _to propose
a law_.

  #ab--auferô, ferre, abstulî, ablâtus#, _to take_ or _carry away,
  remove_; _steal_.

  #ad--adferô, ferre, attulî, adlâtus#, _to bring to, offer, give_;
  _announce, report_.

  #con--cônferô, ferre, tulî, lâtus#, _to bring together, collect_;
  _devote, apply_; _bestow_; #sê cônferre#, _betake one's self, go_.

  #dê--dêferô, ferre, tulî, lâtus#, _to bring_ or _carry down_ or _to,
  carry off, remove_; _give, offer_; _report_; #rem dêferre ad
  populum#, _to submit a matter to the people_.

  #ex--efferô, ferre, extulî, êlâtus#, _to carry out, take away_;
  _lift up, puff up, elate, exalt_.

  #in--înferô, ferre, tulî, lâtus#, _to bring in, upon_, or _against_;
  #bellum înferre#, _to wage_ (offensive) _war_; #sîgna înferre#, _to
  advance against_; #sê înferre#, _to betake one's self_.

  #ob--offerô, ferre, obtulî, oblâtus#, _to bring before, offer,
  present_; _expose_.

  #per--perferô, ferre, tulî, lâtus#, _to bear or carry through,
  carry_; _retain_.

  #prae--praeferô, ferre, tulî, lâtus#, _to carry_ or _put before_;
  _set before, prefer, rate higher_.

  #prô--prôferô, ferre, tulî, lâtus#, _to carry_ or _bring forth,
  produce_; _cite, quote_; _make known, mention_.

  #re--referô, ferre, rettulî, relâtus#, _to bear_ or _bring back_;
  _give back, return, repay_; _lift, raise_; _count, reckon_; #sê
  referre#, _to betake one's self_.

  #trâns--trânsferô, ferre, tulî, lâtus#, _to bear_ or _take over_ or
  _across_, _transport_; _transfer, shift_.

#ferôx, ôcis# [#ferus#], adj., _bold, confident_; _high-strung,
warlike_; _fierce, cruel_.

#ferreus# [#ferrum#], adj., _of iron, iron_.

#ferrum, î#, n., _iron_; _an iron tool_, as a _sword, axe, dagger_.

#ferus#, adj., _wild, barbarous, cruel_.

#fessus#, adj., _tired, weary_; _weak, feeble_.

#fêstînô, âre, âvî, âtum#, _to hasten, hurry_.

#Fêtiâlis, is# (sc. #sacerdôs#), m., _an ambassador, treaty priest_, who
negotiated treaties of peace, and made formal declarations of war.

#Fêtiâlis, e#, adj., _pertaining to the Fetiales, Fetial_ (see preceding
word).

#fîdêliter# [#fîdêlis#, _faithful_], adv., _faithfully_.

#Fîdênâtês, ium#, pl. m., the people of Fidenae, an ancient town on the
Tiber, five miles north of Rome.

#fidês, fideî#, f., _good faith, integrity_; _trust, belief, credence_;
_pledge_.

#fîdûcia, ae# [#fîdus#, _faithful_], f., _trust, confidence, reliance_;
_courage_.

#fîgô, ere, fîxî, fîxus#, _to fix, fasten_.

  #dê--dêfîgô, ere, fîxî, fîxus#, _to fasten_, esp. _to fasten_
  (to the ground) _with amazement, astonish_.

  #sub--suffîgô, ere, fîxî, fîxus#, _to fasten beneath_ or _on_;
  #crucî suffîgere#, _to crucify_.

  #trâns--trânsfîgô, ere, fîxî, fîxus#, _to pierce through, transfix,
  stab_.

#fîlia, ae#, f., _daughter_.

#fîlius, î#, m., _son_.

#fingô, ere, finxî, fîctus#, _to form, invent_; _feign, pretend_.

#fîniô, îre, îvî, îtus# [#fînis#], _to limit, bound_; _finish, end,
settle_.

#fînis, is#, m., _boundary, limit, end_; pl. m., _territory_.

#fînitimus# [#fînis#], adj., _neighboring_; as noun, #fînitimî, ôrum#,
pl. m., _neighbors_.

#fîô, fierî, factus sum#, see #faciô#.

#fîrmô, âre, âvî, âtus# [#fîrmus#], _to make firm, strengthen_.

  #ad--adfîrmô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to strengthen_; _assert, declare_.

  #con--cônfîrmô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to strengthen, ratify, confirm_;
  _assert_.

#fîrmus#, adj., _strong, powerful_; _trusty_.

#flâgitô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to demand_.

  #ex--efflâgitô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to demand vigorously_ or
  _earnestly_.

#flâmen, inis#, m., _a Flamen_, a priest devoted to the service of a
particular god, esp. Jupiter, Mars, and Quirinus. His office was to make
sacrifices and to watch the sacred fire of the god.

#flamma, ae#, f., _flame, fire_.

#flêbiliter# [#flêbilis#, _mournful_], adv., _mournfully, tearfully_.

#flectô, ere, flexî, flexus#, _to bend, turn_.

  #dê--dêflectô, ere, flexî, flexus#, _to bend_ or _turn aside_ or
  _away, turn_.

  #in--înflectô, ere, flexî, flexus#, _to bend, curb, relax_.

#fleô, flêre, flêvî, flêtus#, _to weep_; _bewail_.

#*flîgô, ere#, _to strike_.

  #ad--adflîgô, ere, flîxî, flîctus#, _to dash against_ or _down_;
  _afflict, ruin_.

  #con--cônflîgô, ere, flîxî, flîctus#, _to dash together, contend,
  fight_.

  #prô--prôflîgô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to dash down, overcome_
  (in battle).

#flô, flâre, flâvî, --#, _to blow_.

  #ad--adflô, flâre, flâvî, --#, _to blow towards, blow_.

  #con--cônflô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to blow up, kindle, cause_; #aes
  aliênum cônflâre#, _to contract debt_.

  #in--înflô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to blow up, inflate_.

#flôrêns, entis# [#flôreô#], adj., _blooming, flourishing_; #flôrêns
iuventa#, _youthful beauty_.

#flôreô, êre, uî#, -- [#flôs#, _a flower_], _to bloom, flourish,
prosper_.

#fluctus, ûs# [#fluô#], m., _wave, billow, flood_.

#flûmen, inis# [#fluô#], n., _stream, river_.

#fluô, ere, fluxî, --#, _to flow_.

  #con--cônfluô, ere, fluxî, --#, _to flow_ or _stream together,
  assemble_.

  #dis--diffluô, ere, fluxî, --#, _to flow in different directions,
  melt away, disappear_; #ôtiô et lûxû diffluere#, _to abandon one's
  self to ease and luxury_.

#fluvius, î# [#fluô#], m., _a stream, river_.

#foculus, î# [dim. of #focus#], m., _a fire-pan, brazier_.

#focus, î#, m., _fireplace, hearth_.

#fodiô, ere, fôdî, fossus#, _to dig_.

  #con--cônfodiô, ere, fôdî, fossus#, _to stab, pierce_.

  #sub--suffodiô, ere, fôdî, fossus#, _to dig beneath, undermine,
  tunnel_; _stab beneath_.

  #trâns--trânsfodiô, ere, fôdî, fossus#, _to pierce, stab, slash_.

#foedê# [#foedus#, _foul_], adv., _foully, basely_.

#foederâtus# [#foedus#], adj., _leagued_ or _allied with_.

#foedus, eris#, n., _a treaty, alliance_.

#fôns, fontis#, m., _a spring, fountain_.

#forâs# [#*fora#, _a door_; cf. #foris#], adv., _out of doors, forth,
out_.

#fore#, fut. infin. of #sum#.

#forênsis, e# [#forum#], adj., _of_ or _in the forum, forensic_.

#foris, is#, f., _a door_; usually in pl.

#fôrma, ae#, f., _form, figure, beauty_.

#formîdolôsus# [#formîdô#, _dread_], adj., _dreadful, terrible_.

#fors, fortis# (only nom. and abl. sing.), f., _chance, accident, good
fortune_.

#fortâsse# [#fors#], adv., _perhaps, possibly_.

#forte# [abl. of #fors#], adv., _by chance_.

#fortis, e#, adj., _strong, brave_.

#fortiter# [#fortis#], adv., _bravely_.

#fortitûdô, inis# [#fortis#], f., _bravery, resolution_.

#fortûna, ae# [#fors#], f., _luck, fortune_ (whether good or ill);
personified, _the goddess of fortune_.

#Forum, î# [cf. #forîs#, _out of doors_], n., _an out-of-door place,
market, Forum_; esp. the _Forum Rômânum_ between the Capitoline and
Palatine hills. It was the center of the political, religious, and
business life of Rome.

#fossa, ae# [#fodiô#], f., _a ditch_.

#foveô, êre, fôvî, fôtus#, _to warm, cherish, favor_.

#re--refoveô, êre, fôvî, fôtus#, _to restore, refresh, revive_.

#frâgmentum, î# [#frangô#], n., _fragment, bit_.

#fragor, ôris# [#frangô#], m., _noise_, esp. _thunder peal_.

#frangô, ere, frêgî, frâctus#, _to break in pieces, break_; _subdue,
overcome_.

  #re--refringô, ere, frêgî, frâctus#, _to break up_ or _open_.

#frâter, tris#, m., _brother_.

#frâternus# [#frâter#], adj., _brother's, brotherly_.

#fraudô, âre, âvî, âtus# [#fraus#], _to cheat, rob_.

#fraus, fraudis#, f., _foul play, treachery_.

#frendô, ere, --, --#, _to gnash the teeth_.

#frênum, î#, n., _bridle, curb, rein_.

#frequêns, entis#, adj., _crowded, frequent_; _in great numbers_.

#frequenter# [#frequêns#], adv., _often_.

#frequentia, ae# [#frequêns#], f., _crowd, throng_.

#frîgidus# [#frîgeô#, _to be cold_], adj., _cold_.

#frûgâlitâs, âtis# [#frûgâlis#, _thrifty_], f., _thrift, economy,
frugality_.

#frûmentârius# [#frûmentum#], adj., _concerning corn_; #rês
frûmentâria#, _the corn supply_.

#frûmentum, î# [#fruor#], n., _grain, corn_.

#fruor, fruî, frûctus sum#, _to use, enjoy_.

  #per--perfruor, fruî, frûctus sum#, _to enjoy thoroughly_.

#frûstrâ#, adv., _in vain, fruitlessly_.

#Fûfetius, î#, m., _Mettius Fûfetius_, leader of the Albans against
Tullius Hostilius.

#Fûfidius, î#, m., a follower of Sulla.

#fuga, ae#, f., _flight_.

#fugiô, ere, fûgî, --#, _to flee, flee from_.

  #ab--aufugiô, ere, fûgî, --#, _to flee from, run away, escape_.

  #con--cônfugiô, ere, fûgî, --#, _to flee for refuge_; _resort to_.

  #ex--effugiô, ere, fûgî, --#, _to escape_.

  #prô--profugiô, ere, fûgî, --#, _to flee, escape_.

  #re--refugiô, ere, fûgî, --#, _to flee back, escape_.

  #trâns--trânsfugiô, ere, fûgî, --#, _to flee to the other side, go
  over to the enemy, desert_.

#fugô, âre, âvî, âtus# [#fugiô#], _to put to flight, rout_.

#fulgeô, êre, fulsî, --#, _to flash, gleam_.

#fulmen, inis# [#fulgeô#], n., _lightning flash, thunderbolt_.

#Fulvius, î#, m., _A. Fulvius_, who put his son to death because he
joined Catiline's conspiracy.

#fûnâle, is# [#fûnis#, _a cord_], n., _a torch_.

#fundô, ere, fûdî, fûsus#, _to pour, pour out, shed_; _rout, scatter_.

  #circum--circumfundo, ere, fûdî, fûsus#, _to pour about_; pass., _to
  surround_.

  #ex--effundô, ere, fûdî, fûsus#, _to pour out_; _scatter, squander,
  lavish_.

  #prô--profundô, ere, fûdî, fûsus#, _to pour forth or out, squander,
  waste_.

#fundus, î#, m., _farm, estate_.

#fungor, î, fûnctus sum#, _to perform, discharge, serve through_
(an office).

  #dê--dêfungor, î, fûnctus sum#, _to perform, finish_; _to die_
  (sc. #vîtâ#).

#fûnus, eris#, n., _burial, funeral rites_.

#furêns, entis# [orig. part, of #furô#, _to rave_], adj., _furious,
raging_.

#Fûrius, î#, m., _P. Fûrius Philus_, who revealed the plan of certain
nobles to leave Italy after the battle of Cannae.

#furor, ôris# [#furô#, _to rave_], m., _rage, madness, fury_.

#fûrtô# [abl. of #fûrtum#, _theft_], adv., _stealthily, secretly_.

#futûrus# [orig. fut. part, of #sum#], adj., _coming, future_.


#G#

#Gabiî, ôrum#, pl. m., an ancient town in Latium, east of Rome.

#Gabînî, ôrum#, pl. m., the inhabitants of Gabii.

#Gadês, ium#, pl. f., a town on the southern coast of Spain (modern
Cadiz).

#Gaetulî, ôrum#, pl. m., _the Gaetuli_, a tribe of northern Africa.

#Gâius, î#, m., a Roman praenomen.

#Gallia, ae#, f., _Gaul_, which included modern France, Belgium and
Holland, and the parts of Germany and Switzerland west of the Rhine.

#Gallus, î#, m., _a Gaul_.

#gaudium, î#, n., _joy, gladness_.

#Gaurus, î#, m., _a mountain of Campania_.

#gaza, ae#, f., _treasure, riches_.

#geminâtus#, adj., _doubled, twofold_; _consecutive_.

#geminus#, adj., _twin, twofold_. As noun, #geminî, ôrum#, pl. m.,
_twins_.

#gemô, ere, uî, --#, _to sigh, groan_.

#gener, generî#, m., _a son-in-law_.

#genitus#, see #gîgnô#.

#gêns, gentis#, f., _a gens_ or _clan_, consisting of a number of
families claiming a common lineage, and having certain religious rites
in common; _tribe, people, nation_.

#genû, ûs#, n., _knee_.

#genus, eris#, n., _race, family, stock, birth_; _kind, class, sort_.

#Germânî, ôrum#, pl. m., _the Germans_.

#Germânia, ae#, f., _Germany_.

#gerô, ere, gessî, gestus#, _to bear, carry_; _wear_; _carry on, wage,
manage_; _perform, do_; #sê gerere#, _to conduct one's self, behave_;
#rem pûblicam gerere#, _to administer the state_; #rês gestae#,
_exploits, history_.

  #con--congerô, ere, gessî, gestus#, _to bring_ or _heap together,
  collect_.

#gestô, âre, âvî, âtus# [freq. of #gerô#], _to bear, carry, wear_.

#gestus, ûs# [#gerô#], m., _bearing_; _gesture_.

#gîgnô, ere, genuî, genitus#, _to produce, beget_; #genitus#, _born of_.

#gladius, î#, m., _a sword_.

#glôria, ae#, f., _glory, fame, renown_.

#glôrior, ârî, âtus sum#, _to boast, brag, pride one's self_.

#glôriôsê# [#glôria#], adv., _gloriously_.

#Gnaeus, î#, m., a Roman praenomen.

#Gracchus, î#, m., a family name in the Sempronian gens.

  1. _Ti. Semprônius Gracchus_, tribune of the people in 133 B.C.

  2. _C. Semprônius Gracchus_, brother of (1), and tribune in 123
  B.C.; killed in 121.

#gradior, gradî, gressus sum#, _to walk, step_.

  #ad--aggredior, î, gressus sum#, _to approach, attack, assail_.

  #con--congredior, î, gressus sum#, _to meet_; _join battle, fight_.

  #dis--dîgredior, î, gressus sum#, _to go apart or away, depart_.

  #ex--êgredior, î, gressus sum#, _to go_ or _march out_ or _away_;
  _disembark_. (The verb is construed with the abl., the abl. with
  #ex#, or the acc.).

  #in--ingredior, î, gressus sum#, _to enter, advance, proceed_.

  #prô--prôgredior, î, gressus sum#, _to go forth_ or _on, advance_.

  #re--regredior, î, gressus sum#, _to go back, return, retreat_.

  #trâns--trânsgredior, î, gressus sum#, _to step over_ or _across,
  cross_.

#gradus, ûs#, m., _a step_; _stage, period, degree_; pl., _steps,
stairs_.

#Graecia, ae#, f., _Greece_.

#Graeculus, î# [dim. of #Graecus#], m., _a poor_ or _paltry Greek_.

#Graecus#, adj., _Greek, Grecian_. As noun, #Graecus, î#, m., _a Greek_.

#grânum, î#, n., _a grain, seed_.

#graphium, î#, n., _stylus_ (of metal) for writing, _pen_.

#grâtia, ae# [#grâtus#], f., _favor, regard, credit_; _influence_;
_return, thanks, gratitude_; #grâtiam habêre#, _to feel thankful_;
#grâtiâs agere#, _to show gratitude, thank_; #grâtiam referre#, _to
repay a favor_; #grâtiâ#, with preceding gen., frequent in expressions
of purpose, _for the sake of_.

#grâtulor, ârî, âtus sum# [#grâtus#], _to show joy, congratulate_.

#grâtus#, adj., _pleasing, dear, acceptable_.

#gravis, e#, adj., _heavy, severe, difficult_; _weighty, important_.

#gravitâs, âtis# [#gravis#], f., _weight_; _dignity, influence,
importance_.

#graviter# [#gravis#], adv., _weightily_; _vigorously, seriously, with
dignity_.

#gravor, ârî, âtus sum# [#gravis#], _to be burdened_; _take amiss,
grudge_.

#grex, gregis#, f., _herd, common herd_; _band, company_.

#gubernâtor, ôris# [#gubernô#, _to steer_], m., _helmsman, pilot_.


#H#

#habeô, êre, uî, itus#, _to have, hold, keep_; _consider, regard, treat,
use_; _render_ (honor, etc.); #ôrâtiônem habêre#, _to deliver a speech_;
#lûdibriô habêre#, _to mock_.

  #ad--adhibeô, êre, uî, itus#, _to hold to_ or _toward, apply,
  employ_; _employ as counsel, consult_; _summon, invite_.

  #dê--dêbeô, êre, uî, itus#, _to withhold, owe_; #dêbet, dêbuit# +
  inf., _ought, must, should_.

  #ex--exhibeô, êre, uî, itus#, _to hold forth, show, display,
  exhibit_.

  #in--inhibeô, êre, uî, itus#, _to hold_ or _draw in, restrain_.

  #post--posthabeô, êre, uî, itus#, _to place after_ (i.e. lower
  than), _rate lower, esteem less_.

  #prae--praebeô, êre, uî, itus#, _to hold forth, offer, grant,
  supply, furnish_; #aurês praebêre#, _to listen_.

  #prô--prohibeô, êre, uî, itus#, _to check, keep off_; _hinder,
  prevent_.

#habilis, e# [#habeô#], adj., _handy, easily wielded_.

#habitâtiô, ônis# [#habitô#], f., _dwelling-place_.

#habitô, âre, âvî, âtum# [freq. of #habeô#], _to inhabit_; _dwell,
live_.

#habitus, ûs# [#habeô#], m., _state, condition_; _habit, dress, attire_.

#hâlitus, ûs#, m., _breath_.

#Hamilcar, aris#, m., a famous Carthaginian general, father of
Hannibal (2).

#Hannibal, alis#, m., a Carthaginian name.

  1. A naval commander, defeated by C. Duilius, 260 B.C.

  2. The son of Hamilcar, born B.C. 247. He invaded Italy in 218, but
  was defeated by Scipio at Zama in 202; he then fled to the East, and
  died in 183.

#Hannô, ônis#, m., a Carthaginian general, defeated by Regulus.

#haruspex, icis#, m., _a soothsayer_.

#Hasdrubal, alis#, m., a Carthaginian name.

  1. Son of Hamilcar, and brother of Hannibal (2); fought against
  Scipio Africanus in Spain; defeated and killed at the battle of the
  Metaurus in Italy, 207 B.C.

  2. Son of Gisco; fought against Scipio Africanus in Spain and
  Africa.

#hasta, ae#, f., _a spear_.

#haud#, adv., _by no means, not, not at all_.

#hauriô, îre, hausî, haustus#, _to drink, swallow_.

  #ex--exhauriô, îre, hausî, haustus#, _to empty, exhaust_; _ruin,
  impoverish_.

#Herculês, is#, m., a Grecian hero, celebrated for his strength and
marvelous deeds in many parts of the world.

#hêrês, êdis#, m., _an heir_.

#hîc, haec, hôc#, dem. pron., _this, the following, the latter_; _he,
she, it_.

#hîc# [#hîc#], adv., _here, hereupon, at this point_.

#hiems, hiemis#, f., _winter, storm_.

#Hierosolyma, ôrum#, pl. n., _Jerusalem_.

#hilarê# [#hilarus#, _merry_], adv., _merrily, cheerfully, gaily_.

#hilaritâs, âtis# [#hilaris#, _merry_], f., _merriment, gaiety_.

#hinc# [#hîc#], adv., _from this place_ or _time, hence_; #hinc--hinc#,
_on this side . . . on that, on the one side . . . on the other_.

#hirundô, inis#, f., _a swallow_.

#Hispânia, ae#, f., _Spain_ (including Portugal). It was divided into
two provinces, _Hispânia Citerior_ and _Hispânia Ûlterior_.

#Hispâniênsis, e#, adj., _Spanish, in Spain_.

#Hispânus#, adj., _Spanish_. As noun, #Hispânus, î#, m., _a Spaniard_.

#hodiê# [#hô(c)# + #diê#], adv., _to-day_.

#homô, inis#, m. and f., _a human being, man_; #hominês#, _mankind, the
world_.

#honestê# [#honestus#], adv., _honorably_.

#honestus# [#honôs#], adj., _honored, respected_; _honorable, right,
virtuous_.

#honôrâtê# [#honôrâtus#, _honored_], adv., _honorably, with respect_.

#honôrificus# [#honôs# + #faciô#], adj., _that does honor,
complimentary_.

#honorô, âre, âvî, âtus# [#honôs#], _to honor, do honor to_.

#honôs# or #honor, ôris#, m., _honor, respect, esteem_; _public office_;
personified, _Honor_ (a deity).

#hôra, ae#, f., _hour_, the twelfth part of the day (sunrise to sunset)
or night.

#Horâtius, î#, m., the name of a Roman gens.

#horreô, êre, uî, --#, _to stand on end, bristle_; _shudder at, shrink
from_.

#horror, ôris# [#horreô#], m., _dread, terror, horror_.

#hortâtiô, ônis# [#hortor#], f., _encouragement, exhortation_.

#hortor, ârî, âtus sum#, _to exhort, urge_.

#hortus, î#, m., _a garden_.

#hospes, itis#, m., _entertainer, host_; _guest, friend_; _stranger_.

#hospita, ae# [#hospes#], f., _a stranger_; _guest_.

#hospitium, î# [#hospes#], n., _entertainment, hospitality_; _lodgings,
inn_.

#hostia, ae#, f., _an animal for sacrifice, victim_.

#hostîlis, e# [#hostis#], adj., _of_ or _from the enemy, hostile_.

#hostîliter# [#hostîlis#], adv., _in hostile manner_.

#Hostîlius, î#, m., the name of a Roman gens.

  1. _Hostus Hostîlius_, a general of the time of Romulus.

  2. _Tullus Hostîlius_, third king of Rome.

#hostis, is#, m., _an enemy_.

#hûc# [#hîc#], adv., _to this place, hither_; #hûc . . . illûc#, _hither
. . . thither_.

#hûiuscemodî# [#hîc# + #modus#], adv., _of this_ (i.e. the following)
_kind_.

#hûmânitâs, âtis# [#hûmânus#], f., _humanity, kindliness_; _refinement,
culture_.

#hûmânus# [#homô#], adj., _human, of man_; _kind, refined, cultured_.

#humilis, e# [#humus#, _the ground_], adj., _low_; _lowly, humble,
common_.


#I#

#iaceô, êre, uî, --#, _to lie, lie prostrate_ or _dead_.

#iaciô, iacere, iêcî, iactus#, _to throw, cast, hurl_.

  #ab--abiciô, ere, iêcî, iectus#, _to throw down, away_, or _aside,
  lay aside_.

  #ad--adiciô, icere, iêcî, iectus#, _to throw to, add_ or _join to,
  add_ (in speech).

  #con--coniciô, icere, coniêcî, coniectus#, _to throw together,
  unite_; _hurl, throw_.

  #dê--dêiciô, icere, iêcî, iectus#, _to throw_ or _hurl down, bring
  down_; _lay low, dislodge, destroy_.

  #ex--êiciô, icere, iêcî, iectus#, _to cast_ or _drive out, expel_.

  #in--iniciô, icere, iêcî, iectus#, _to throw in_; _put in_ or _on,
  lay_; _inspire, suggest_.

  #inter--intericiô, icere, iêcî, iectus#, _to throw_ or _place
  between, interpose; intervene_ (in pass.).

  #ob--obiciô, icere, iêcî, iectus#, _to throw before, put in the
  way_; _put in the hands of, turn over_.

  #prô--prôiciô, icere, iêcî, iectus#, _to throw forth, fling out,
  throw_.

  #re--rêiciô, icere, iêcî, iectus#, _to throw back, repel_.

  #sub--subiciô, icere, iêcî, iectus#, _to throw_ or _place under_;
  _hand up_; _present, submit_; _subdue_.

  #super--superiaciô, ere, iêcî, iectus#, _to throw across, let down_.

  #trâns--trâiciô, icere, iêcî, iectus#, _to throw_ or _carry across,
  transport_; _pierce, penetrate, transfix_; _go_ or _pass over,
  cross_.

#iactâtiô, ônis# [#iactô#], f., _tossing, motion_.

#iactitô, âre, --, --# [freq. of #iactô#], _to boast, brag_.

#iactô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to push_ or _toss about_; _boast of, take
pride in_.

#iam#, adv., _already, by this time, now_; _soon, presently_; #iam iam#,
_already, at that very moment_; #iam dûdum# or #iam prîdem#, _long ago,
long since_.

#iam dûdum#, see #iam#.

#Iâniculum, î#, n., a hill on the west bank of the Tiber.

#iânua, ae#, f., _a door, entrance_.

#Iânus, î#, m., #Janus#, an old Latin divinity, who presided over all
beginnings; commonly represented with two faces.

#Iarbâs, ae#, m., king of Numidia and Mauretania (the modern Morocco).

#ibi#, adv., _there, on that side_; _then, thereupon_.

#ibîdem# [#ibi#], adv., _in the same place, on the spot_.

#îcô, ere, îcî, îctus#, _to strike_; #foedus îcere#, _to strike_
(conclude) _a treaty_.

#îctus, ûs# [#îcô#], m., _blow, stroke, wound_.

#îdem, eadem, idem#, dem. pron., _the same_; often best rendered by
adv., _also, too, besides_.

#ideô#, adv., _for that reason, therefore_; _with this_ (that)
_purpose_.

#Îdûs, uum#, pl. f., _the Ides_, or middle of the month; the fifteenth
of March, May, July, and October, the thirteenth of other months.

#igitur#, adv., _then, therefore, accordingly_.

#îgnâvia, ae# [#îgnâvus#, _idle_], f., _idleness, sloth_;
_worthlessness_.

#îgnis, is#, m., _fire_.

#îgnôminia, ae# [#in# neg. + #(g)nômen#], f., _dishonor, disgrace,
degradation_.

#îgnôrô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _not to know_; _to be ignorant of, be
unacquainted with_.

#îgnôscô#, see #nôscô#.

#îgnôtus# [#in# neg. + #(g)nôtus#], adj., _unknown, unfamiliar,
strange_.

#îlicô# [#in# + #locô#], adv., _on the spot, at once, immediately_.

#ille, illa, illud#, dem. pron., _that, yonder_; _he, she, it_; _the
famous, the_.

#illîc# [#ille#], adv., _there, yonder_.

#illûc# [#ille#], adv., _to that place, thither_.

#imâgô, inis#, f., _likeness, semblance, image_; _statue_.

#imbellis, e# [#in# neg. + #bellum#], adj., _unfit for war, unwarlike,
cowardly_.

#imber, bris#, m., _rain, shower_.

#imbuô, ere, î, bûtus#, _to wet, moisten_; _inspire, imbue_.

#imitor, ârî, âtus sum#, _to imitate, copy_.

#immâtûrus# [#in# neg. + #mâtûrus#, _ripe_], adj., _unripe_; _untimely,
premature_.

#immênsus# [#in# neg. + #mêtior#, _to measure_], adj., _immeasurable,
vast, immense_.

#immineô, êre, uî, --#, _to overhang, threaten_.

#immittô#, see #mittô#.

#immô#, adv., _by no means, nay_.

#immolô, âre, âvî, âtus# [#in# + #mola#, _meal_], _to sprinkle_
(a victim) _with sacrificial meal, sacrifice_.

#immortâlis, e# [#in# neg. + #mortâlis#], adj., _immortal_.

#immôtus# [#in# neg. + #môtus#, part of #moveô#], adj., _unmoved,
motionless_.

#impâr, paris# [#in# neg. + #pâr#], adj., _unequal_.

#impatiêns, entis# [#in# neg. + #patiêns#], adj., _impatient,
intolerant_.

#impendium, î# [#impendô#, _to expend_], n., _outlay, cost, expense_.

#impênsa, ae# [#impendô#, _to expend_], f., _outlay, cost, expense_.

#imperâtor, ôris# [#imperô#], m., _commander-in-chief, general_;
_emperor_.

#imperâtôrius# [#imperâtor#], adj., _of a general_.

#imperfectus# [#in# neg. + #perfectus#, part. of #perficiô#], adj.,
_unfinished_.

#imperium, î# [#imperô#], n., _a command, order_; _military authority_;
_sovereignty, supremacy_; _the state_.

#imperô, âre, âvî, âtum#, _to command, order_; _rule, govern_; _levy,
demand_.

#impetrô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to gain by asking, obtain, procure_.

#impetus, ûs# [#in# + #petô#], m., _an attack, onset_; _impulse,
excitement_; _violence, energy, fury_.

#impietâs, âtis# [#impius#], f., _irreverence, impiety_.

#impiger, gra, grum# [#in# neg. + #piger#, _lazy_], adj., _active,
energetic_.

#impius# [#in# + #pius#], adj., _irreverent, wicked, undutiful_.

#impleô#, see #*pleô#.

#implicô, âre, âvî# or #uî, âtus# or #itus# [#in# + #plicô#, _to fold_],
_to fold in, envelop_; _involve, attack_.

#implôrô, âre, âvî, âtus# [#in# + #plôrô#, _to wail, lament_], _to beg,
beseech, implore_.

#impônô#, see #pônô#.

#imprîmîs# [= #in prîmîs#], adv., _especially_.

#imprôvîsus# [#in# neg. + #prôvideô#], adj., _unforeseen, unexpected_.

#impûbês, eris# [#in# neg. + #pûbês#, _full grown_], adj., _youthful_.

#impûgnô#, see #pûgnô#.

#impûnîtus# [#in# neg. + #pûniô#], adj., _unpunished_.

#in#, prep, with (1) acc.; of place, _into, to, on, upon, towards,
against_; of purpose, _for, with a view to_; of other relations,
_respecting, according to_; #in diês#, _day by day_; (2) with abl.; of
place, _in, on, upon, in the midst of, among_; of time, _in, in the
course of, during_; of other relations, _in the case of, respecting,
according to_.

#in#, _not_, a prefix, which, when attached to adj. or participles,
negatives or reverses their meaning.

#inaestimâbilis, e# [#in# neg. + #aestimô#, _to reckon_], _inestimable_.

#inambulô#, see #ambulô#.

#inânis, e#, adj., _empty_; _vain, idle_.

#inaudîtus# [#in# neg. + #audîtus#, part. of #audiô#], adj., _unheard
of, strange_.

#incautus# [#in# neg. + #cautus#, _wary_], adj., _unsuspecting, off
one's guard_.

#incêdô#, see #cêdô#.

#incendium, î# [#incendô#], n., _fire, conflagration_.

#incendô#, see #candeô#·

#inceptum, î# [#incipiô#], n., _beginning, attempt_; _undertaking,
purpose_.

#incertus# [#in# neg. + #certus#], adj., _uncertain, doubtful_.

#incêssô, ere, --, --# [freq. of #incêdô#], _to assail, attack_;
_rail at_.

#incidô#, see #cadô#.

#incipiô#, see #capiô#.

#incitô#, see #citô#.

#inclâmô#, see #clâmô#.

#inclînô, âre, âvî, âtus# [#in# + #*clînô#, _to lean_], (1) trans., _to
cause to lean, bend, turn_; (2) intrans., _lean, incline_; _yield, give
way_.

#inclitus#, adj., _famous_.

#inclûdô#, see #claudô#.

#incôgnitus# [#in# neg. + #côgnitus#, part. of #côgnôscô#], adj.,
_unknown_.

#incola, ae# [#incolô#], m., _inhabitant_.

#incolô#, see #colô#.

#incolumis, e#, adj., _safe, unharmed_.

#incônstantia, ae# [#in# neg. + #cônstantia#], f., _changeableness,
fickleness_.

#incrêdibilis, e# [#in# neg. + #crêdô#], adj., _beyond belief,
incredible_.

#increpô, âre, uî, itus#, _to sound, resound_; _scold, upbraid_;
_exclaim_.

#incrêscô#, see #crêscô#.

#incumbô#, see #*cumbô#.

#incûriôsus# [#in# neg. + #cûriôsus#, _careful_], adj., _careless,
negligent_.

#incursiô, ônis# [#incurrô#, _to attack_], f., _onset, attack, raid_.

#inde#, adv., _from that place_ or _time, thence_; _thereupon_; _from
that circumstance, therefore_.

#index, icis# [#indicô#], m., _mark, sign_.

#indicium, î# [#indicô#], n., _sign, indication, evidence_.

#indîcô# see #dîcô#.

#indicô#, see #dicô#.

#indictus# [#in# neg. + #dictus#, part of #dîcô#], adj., _unsaid_;
_unplead_.

#indîgnâtiô, ônis# [#indîgnor#, _to be angry_], f., _displeasure,
anger_.

#indîgnê# [#indîgnus#], adv., _unworthily_; _angrily_; #indîgnê ferre#
_to take_ (_it_) _amiss_.

#indîgnor, ârî, âtus sum# [#indîgnus#], _to think unworthy_; _be angry_.

#indîgnus# [#in# neg. + #dîgnus#], adj., _unworthy of, unfit for_ (with
abl.).

#indô#, see #dô#.

#indolês, is#, f., _inborn quality, natural gifts_; _character, nature,
spirit_.

#indûcô#, see #dûcô#.

#indûstria, ae# [#indûstrius#, _active_], f., _diligence, activity,
industry_.

#ineô#, see (1) #eô#.

#inermis, e# [#in# neg. + #arma#], adj., _unarmed, defenseless_.

#înfacêtê# [#in# neg. + #facêtê#], adv., _without wit_.

#înfâns, antis# [#in# neg. + #fâns#, part. of #fârî#, _to speak_], adj.,
_not speaking, speechless_; as noun, m. and f., _an infant_.

#înfêlîx, îcis# [#in# neg. + #fêlîx#], adj., _unfortunate, disastrous_.

#înferior, ôris# [comp. of #înferus#, _low_], adj., _lower, inferior_.

#înferô#, see #ferô#.

#înfêstô, âre, âvî, âtus# [#înfêstus#], _to annoy, disturb_.

#înfêstus#, adj., _hostile, threatening_.

#înficiô#, see #faciô#.

#înflammô, âre, âvî, âtus# [#in# + #flamma#], _to kindle, arouse,
excite_.

#înflâtus# [#înflô#], adj., _blown up, inflated_.

#înflectô#, see #flectô#.

#înflô#, see #flô#.

#înfôrmô, âre, âvî, âtus# [#in# + #fôrma#], _to shape, mould, fashion_;
_train, instruct_.

#înfrâ#, adv. and prep. with acc., _below, beneath_.

#ingemîscô, ere, gemuî, --# [#in# + #gemîscô#, incep. of #gemô#], _to
groan over, groan_.

#ingenium, î# [#in# + #gîgnô#], n., _natural gifts, nature_; _ability,
intellect, wit_; _character, disposition_.

#ingêns, entis#, adj., _large, huge, great_.

#ingenuus#, adj., _free-born_; _noble, liberal_.

#ingrâtus# [#in# neg. + #grâtus#], adj., _unpleasant, thankless,
ungrateful_.

#ingredior#, see #gradior#.

#inhibeô#, see #habeô#.

#iniciô#, see #iaciô#.

#inimîcitia, ae# [#inimîcus#], f., _enmity_.

#inimîcus# [#in# neg. + #amîcus#], adj., _unfriendly, hostile_; as noun,
_a personal enemy, foe_, as distinguished from #hostis#, _a public
enemy_.

#inîquê# [#inîquus#, _unjust_], adv., _unjustly_.

#initium, î# [#ineô#], n., _beginning_; #initiô#, abl. as adv., _at the
outset, at first_.

#iniûria, ae# [#in# neg. + #iûs#], f., _wrong, injustice_; _insult,
injury_.

(#iniussus, ûs#) [#in# neg. + #iubeô#], m., found in abl. only, _without
orders_.

#inlîdô#, see #laedô#.

#inlûstris, e#, adj., _bright, clear_; _famous, renowned_
(cf. #clârus#).

#innîtor#, see #nîtor#.

#innocentia, ae# [#in# neg. + #noceô#], f., _harmlessness, innocence,
integrity_.

#innôtêscô, ere, nôtuî, --# [#in# + #nôtêscô#, _to become known_], _to
become known_.

#innoxius# [#in# neg. + #noxius#, _harmful_], adj., _harmless,
blameless, innocent_.

#innumerâbilis, e# [#in# neg. + #numerô#, _to count_], adj., _beyond
number, countless_.

#innumerus# [#in# neg. + #numerus#], adj., _countless_.

#innuô#, see #*nuô#.

#inopia, ae# [#inops#], f., _want, scarcity, need, poverty_.

#inopînâtus# [#in# neg. + #opînor#, _to think_], adj., _unexpected_.

#inops, opis# [#in# neg. + #ops#], adj., _without resources, helpless,
poor, needy_.

#inquam#, def. verb, _I say_. See #297#, II, 2: 144, _b_: _175_, 2.

#inquiêtus# [#in# neg. + #quiêtus#], adj., _restless_.

#inquinô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to stain, defile_.

#inrîdeô#, see #rîdeô#.

#inrîsus, ûs# [#inrîdeô#], m., _derision, mockery_.

#inruô#, see #ruô#.

#înscientia, ae# [#însciêns#, _ignorant_], adj., _ignorance_.

#înscius# [#in# neg. + #sciô#], adj., _ignorant, unaware_.

#înscrîbô#, see #scrîbô#.

#însequor#, see #sequor#.

#însideô#, see #sedeô#.

#însidiae, ârum# [#însideô#], pl. f., _ambush_; _trap_; _artifice,
plot_.

#însidior, ârî, âtus sum# [#însidiae#], _to lie in wait for, plot
against_.

#însîgne, is# [#însîgnis#], n., _a mark, badge_.

#însîgnis, e# [#in# + #sîgnum#], adj., _marked, conspicuous, noted,
famous_.

#însiliô#, see #saliô#.

#însinuô, âre, âvî, âtus# [#in# + #sinus#, _fold, coil_], _to push or
thrust in_.

#însitus# [#inserô#, _to implant_], adj., _inborn, innate, ingrafted_.

#însolêns, entis# [#in# neg. + #solêns#, part. of #soleô#], adj.,
_unusual, haughty, insolent_.

#însolenter# [#însolêns#], adv., _haughtily_.

#însolentia, ae# [#însolêns#], f., _unusual_ or _extravagant conduct,
insolence_.

#înspêrâbilis, e# [#in# neg. + #spêrô#], adj., _unhoped for,
unexpected_.

#înspiciô#, see #*speciô#.

#înstituô#, see #statuô#.

#înstitûtum, î# [#înstituô#], n., _institution_; _habit, custom_.

#înstrûmentum, î# [#înstruô#], n., _tool_; _collectively, stock of
tools, plant_.

#înstruô#, see #struô#.

#însusurrô, âre, âvî, âtus# [#in# + #susurrus#, _a whisper_], _to
whisper to, suggest_.

#însum#, see #sum#.

#intâctus# [#in# neg. + #tâctus#, part. of #tangô#], adj., _untouched,
uninjured_.

#integer, gra, grum# [#in# neg. + root #tag# in #tangô#], adj.,
_untouched, uninjured_; #integer, â#, _free from, untouched by_.

#intellegô#, see #legô#.

#intempestus#, adj., _stormy_.

#intendô#, see #tendô#.

#intentus# [orig. part. of #intendô#], adj., _attentive, intent_.

#inter#, prep. with acc.; of place, _between, among_; of time, _during_.

#intercalârius# [#intercalô#], adj., _intercalary, inserted in the
calendar_.

#intercalô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to intercalate, insert in the calendar_.

#intercipiô#, see #capiô#.

#interdîcô#, see #dîcô#.

#interdiû# [#inter# + #diû#], adv., _by day_.

#interdum# [#inter# + (1) #dum#], adv., _between whiles, now and then,
sometimes_.

#intereâ# [#inter# + #is#], adv., _in the meantime, meanwhile_.

#intereô#, see (1) #eô#.

#interfector, ôris# [#interficiô#], m., _slayer, assassin, murderer_.

#interficiô#, see #faciô#.

#intericiô#, see #iaciô#.

#interim#, adv., _meanwhile_.

#interimô#, see #emô#.

#interitus, ûs# [#intereô#], m., _overthrow, death, destruction_.

#internûntius, î# [#inter# + #nûntius#], m., _go-between, messenger_.

#interpretor, ârî, âtus sum#, _to explain, interpret_; _maintain_.

#interrogô#, see #rogô#.

#intersum#, see #sum#.

#intervâllum, î# [#inter# + #vâllum#], n., _interval_ (of time or
space), _distance_.

#intervertô#, see #vertô#.

#intimus#, adj., _inmost, deepest_; _close, intimate_.

#intolerâbilis, e# [#in# neg. + #tolerô#, _to bear_], adj.,
_unendurable_.

#intrâ#, adv. and prep. with acc., _inside of, within, during_.

#intrô, âre, âvî, âtus# [#intrô#, adv., _within_], _to enter_.

#intrôdûcô#, see #dûcô#.

#introeô#, see (1) #eô#.

#intueor#, see #tueor#.

#intumêscô, ere, tumuî, --# [#in# + #tumêscô#, incep. of #tumeô#, _to be
swollen_], _to swell, rise_.

#inundô, âre, âvî, âtus# [#in# + #undô#, _to rise in waves_], _to
deluge, flood_.

#inûsitâtus# [#in# neg. + #ûsitâtus#, _usual_], adj., _unusual,
unfamiliar, novel_.

#invâdô#, see #vâdô#.

#invalidus# [#in# neg. + #validus#], adj., _weak, feeble_.

#invehô#, see #vehô#.

#inveniô#, see #veniô#.

#invicem, in vicem#, see #vicis#.

#invictus# [#in# neg. + #victus#, part. of #vincô#], adj.,
_unconquerable_.

#invideô#, see #videô#.

#invidia, ae# [#invideô#], f., _envy_; _ill-will, odium, unpopularity_.

#invidiôsus# [#invidia#], adj., _envious_; _exciting envy, unpopular,
hateful_.

#inviolâtus# [#in# neg. + #violô#], adj., _unhurt_.

#invîsus# [orig. part. of #invideô#], adj., _hated, hateful_.

#invîtô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to invite, ask, summon_; _feast, entertain_.

#invîtus#, adj., _unwilling, on compulsion_.

#iocus, î# (pl. also #ioca#), m., _a jest, joke_.

#ipse, a, um#, _himself, herself, itself, themselves_; often best
rendered by _very, mere, in person, even, actually_.

#îra, ae#, f., _anger, passion_.

#îrâscor, î, îrâtus sum# [#îra#], _to be_ or _become angry_.

#îrâtus# [orig. part. of #îrâscor#], adj., _angered, enraged_; _in
anger, angrily_.

#is, ea, id#, dem. pron., _this_ or _that_; _he, she, it_; _such_ (esp.
before #ut# with #subj.#).

#iste, a, ud#, gen. #istîus#, dat. #istî#, _that of yours, your_; _that,
this_.

#ita# [#is#], adv., _in this way, so, thus, as follows_.

#Îtalia, ae#, f., _Italy_. The name did not include the basin of the Po
(Cisalpine Gaul) until the time of Augustus.

#Îtalicus, î#, m., _an Italian_.

#itaque# [#ita# + #que#], adv. and conj., _and so, therefore, as a
consequence, accordingly_.

#item#, adv., _besides, likewise, also_.

#iter, itineris# [#eô, îre#], n., _a journey, march_; _road, highway_.

#iterum#, adv., _a second time, again_.

#Iuba, ae#, m., a king of Numidia, ally of Pompey, but defeated by
Caesar at the battle of Thapsus, B.C. 46.

#iubeô, êre, iussî, iussus#, _to order, command_.

#iûcundê# [#iûcundus#], adv., _agreeably, pleasantly, delightfully_.

#iûcundus#, adj., _pleasing, agreeable, charming, delightful_.

#Iudaea, ae#, f., _Judaea_.

#Iudaeus, î#, m., _a Jew_.

#iûdex, icis# [#iûs# + #dîcô#], m., _a judge, juror_.

#iûdicium, î# [#iûdex#], n., _judgment, decision_.

#iûdicô, âre, âvî, âtus# [#iûdex#], _to examine judicially, judge,
adjudge_; _think, consider_; _declare, resolve_.

#iûgerum, î#, n., a land measure = about two thirds of an English acre;
_an acre_.

#iugulum, î# [dim. of #iugum#], n., _throat, neck_.

#iugum, î# [#iungô#], n., _a yoke, collar_; _mountain summit, range of
mountains_; _a military yoke_, formed by fixing two spears upright in
the ground and tying a third across between their upper ends. Beneath
such a yoke the Romans made their conquered enemies pass, in token of
complete surrender of liberty and life to their conquerors.

#Iugurtha, ae#, m., the famous king of Numidia, who fought with Rome 111
to 106 B.C.; defeated by Marius.

#Iugurthînus#, adj., _of_ or _with Jugurtha, Jugurthine_.

#Iûlia, ae#, f., _Julia_.

  1. Daughter of Julius Caesar, and wife of Pompey.

  2. Sister of Julius Caesar and grandmother of the Emperor Augustus.

#Iûlius, î#, m., the name of a famous Roman gens. See #Caesar#.

#iungô, ere, iûnxî, iûnctus#, _to join together, unite, bind, fasten,
yoke_.

  #ad--adiungô, ere, iûnxî, iûnctus#, _to join_ or _add to, attach_.

  #con--coniungô, ere, iûnxî, iûnctus#, _to fasten together, join,
  unite_.

#iûnior#, see #iuvenis#.

#Iûnius, î#, m., the name of a famous Roman gens. See #Brûtus#.

#Iuppiter, Iovis#, m., the chief god of the Latins, orig.
a personification of the sky. He controlled thunder, lightning, rain,
and storms.

#iûre#, see #iûs#.

#iûrô, âre, âvî, âtus# [#iûs#], _to take an oath, swear_; _swear to_.

  #con--côniûrô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to take an oath together, conspire,
  plot_.

#iûs, iûris#, n., _right, justice, law_; _court of justice, trial in
court_; abl. #iûre# as adv., _rightly, justly_; #in iûs vocâre#, _to
summon into court, bring to trial_.

#iûsiûrandum, î# [#iûs# + #iûrô#], n., _an oath_.

(#iussus, ûs#) [#iubeô#], m., _order, command_ (found only in abl.
sing.).

#iûstitia, ae# [#iûs#], f., _justice, uprightness_.

#iuvenis, is#, comp. #iûnior#, sup. #minimus nâtû#, adj., _young_. As
noun, #iuvenis, is#, m., _young person, youth_ (between 17 and 45);
#iuvenês# or #iûniôrês#, _the fighting men_.

#iuventa, ae# [#iuvenis#], f., _youth_.

#iuventûs, ûtis# [#iuvenis#], f., _youth_; collectively, _young people_,
esp. _fighting men_. Cf. #iuvenis#.


#K#

#Kalendae, ârum#, pl. f., _the Kalends_, or the first day of the month.


#L#

#labor, ôris#, m., _labor, toil_; _hardship, distress_.

#lâbor, î, lâpsus sum#, _to slip_.

  #dê--dêlâbor, î, lâpsus sum#, _to glide down_; _slip_ or _fall down,
  fall_.

  #ex--êlâbor, î, lâpsus sum#, _to slip away, glide off, escape_.

  #prô--prôlâbor, î, lâpsus sum#, _to fall down_; _slip, stumble_.

  #re--relâbor, î, lâpsus sum#, _to slip_ or _sink back_; _flow back,
  subside_.

#labôriôsê# [#labôriôsus#, _toilsome_], adv., _laboriously, carefully_.

#labôrô, âre, âvî, âtum#, _to labor, toil_; _be hard pressed, suffer, be
afflicted_.

  #ex--êlabôrô, âre, âvî, âtum#, _to labor, toil, endeavor_.

#Lacedaemonius, î#, m., an inhabitant of Lacedaemon or Sparta, the chief
city of Laconia, a district of Southern Greece.

#lacerô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to tear to pieces, rend, mutilate, wound_.

#*laciô, ere#, _to entice_.

  #ad--adliciô, ere, lexî, lectus#, _to entice, win over, attract_.

  #ex--êliciô, ere, uî, itus#, _to draw forth, call down_.

  #per--perliciô, ere, lexî, lectus#, _to entice, allure, win over_.

#lacrima, ae#, f., _a tear_.

#lacrimâbundus# [#lacrimô#, _to weep_], adj., _weeping_.

#laedô, ere, laesî, laesus#, _to hurt, injure_.

  #ex--êlîdô, ere, lîsî, lîsus#, _to dash out_; _shatter, crush_.

  #in--inlîdô, ere, lîsî, lîsus#, _to dash against_.

#Laelius, î#, m., gentile name of _C. Laelius_, a friend of Scipio
Africanus.

#laetitia, ae# [#laetus#], f., _joy, exultation_.

#laetus#, adj., _joyful, glad, cheerful_.

#laevus#, adj., _left_.

#lambô, ere, --, --#, _to lick, lap_.

#lâmenta, ôrum#, pl. n., _lamentations_.

#lâmina, ae#, f., _a thin plate_.

#lâna, ae#, f., _wool_.

#lancea, ae#, f., _a spear, lance, dart_.

#lânificium, î# [#lânâ# + #faciô#], n., _spinning, weaving_.

#lanius, î#, m., _a butcher_.

#lapideus# [#lapis#], adj., _of stone, stone_.

#lapis, idis#, m., _a stone_; _milestone_.

#laqueus, î#, m., _noose, halter_.

#Lârentia, ae#, f., see #Acca#.

#largîtiô, ônis# [#largior#, _to bribe_], f., _liberality_; _bribery_.

#latebra, ae#, [#lateô#, _to lie hid_], f., _hiding place_ (usually only
in pl.).

#laterîcius# [#later#, _a brick_], adj., _made of brick, brick_.

#Latînus#, adj., _pertaining to Latium, Latin_; as noun, #Latînus, î#,
m., _an inhabitant of Latium, a Latin_.

#lâtrô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to bark at_.

#latrô, ônis#, m., _robber, brigand_.

#latus, eris#, n., _side_; _flank_.

#laudâbilis, e# [#laudô#], adj., _praiseworthy, commendable_.

#laudandus# [gerundive of #laudô#], adj., _praiseworthy, commendable_.

#laudô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to praise, extol_.

  #con--conlaudô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to praise very highly, extol_.

#laurea, ae# (sc. #corôna#), f., _a laurel wreath_ or _crown_.

#laus, laudis#, f., _praise, fame, glory_; _ability_ (as that which
excites praise). #laudibus ferre#, _to extol_.

#lautus# [part. of #lavô#, _to wash_], adj., _well-washed, neat_;
_elegant, splendid_.

#laxitâs, âtis# [#laxus#, _roomy_], f., _spaciousness, roominess, size_.

#lectîca, ae# [#lectus#], f., _a litter, sedan chair, palanquin_.

#lectulus, î# [dim. of #lectus#], m., _a small couch, bed_.

#lectus, î#, m., _a couch, bed_.

#lêgâtiô, ônis# [#lêgô#, to commission], f., _embassy, legation_.

#lêgâtus, î# [#lêgô#, _to commission_], m., _one specially commissioned,
ambassador, envoy_; _a deputy, lieutenant_, an officer next in command
to the #imperâtor#, who selected him subject to the approval of the
senate. Often several attended the general, serving in turn, acting as
his counsellors, and commanding in his absence.

#legiô, ônis# [#legô#], f., _a legion_, containing from four to six
thousand men; #legiônês#, _the infantry_, as distinct from the cavalry.

#lêgitimus# [#lêx#], adj., _fixed by law, legal_.

#legô, ere, lêgî, lêctus#, _to gather, collect_; _select, appoint,
choose_; _read_.

  #con--conligô, ere, lêgî, lêctus#, _to collect, gather_.

  #dê--dêligô, ere, lêgî, lêctus#, _to choose, select_; _levy_.

  #dis--dîligô, ere, lêxî, lêctus#, _to single out, esteem, love,
  prize_.

  #ex--êligô, ere, lêgî, lêctus#, _to pick out, choose, select_.

  #inter--intellegô, ere, lêxî, lêctus#, _learn_; _perceive,
  understand_.

#lêniter# [#lênis#, _soft, gentle_], adv., _softly, mildly, lightly_.

#lênôcinium, î#, n., _excessive finery_ or _nicety in dress_.

#Lentulus, î#, m., _P. Cornêlius Lentulus Dolâbella_, a son-in-law of
Cicero.

#lentus#, adj., _pliant, tough_; _slow, sluggish_.

#Lepidus, î#, m., _M. Aemilius_, consul with Caesar, B.C. 46; a member,
with Octavianus and Antony, of the second triumvirate.

#lêtâlis, e# [#lêtum#, _death_], adj., _deadly, fatal_.

#levis, e#, adj., _light, slight, trivial_.

#leviter# [#levis#], adv., _lightly, slightly_.

#lêx, lêgis#, f., _law, decree_; _term, condition_.

#libêns, entis# [#libet#, _it pleases_], adj., _willing_; _with good
will_ or _pleasure, gladly_.

#libenter# [#libêns#], adv., _gladly, willingly_.

#lîber, lîbera, lîberum#, adj., _free_; _generous_; _outspoken, frank_.

#liber, librî#, m., _a book_.

#lîberâlitâs, âtis# [#lîberâlis#, _generous_], f., _generosity,
kindness_; _a gift_.

#lîberâliter# [#lîberâlis#, _generous_], adv., _kindly, generously,
graciously_.

#lîberî, ôrum# [#lîber#], pl. m., _children_; properly the free persons
of the family as distinct from the slaves.

#lîberô, âre, âvî, âtus# [#lîber#], _to set free, free_; _acquit,
absolve_.

#lîbertâs, âtis# [#lîber#], f., _freedom, independence_.

#lîbertus, î# [#lîber#], m., _a freedman_.

#libîdô, inis# [#libet#, _it pleases_], f., _pleasure_; _lust,
wantonness, passion_.

#lîbrô, âre, âvî, âtus# [#lîbra#, _a balance_], _to balance, poise,
brandish_.

#licentia, ae# [#licet#], f., _freedom, license_.

#licet, êre, uit# or #itum est#, impers., _it is allowed_ or
_permitted_.

#lîctor, ôris#, m., _a lictor_, a Roman officer. The lictors were orig.
attendants of the kings, but later were granted to dictators, consuls,
and praetors. They accompanied these magistrates whenever they appeared
in public, and cleared the way before them. They also carried the
fasces, and executed criminal sentences.

#lîgneus# [#lîgnum#, _wood_], adj., _wooden_.

#ligô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to bind_.

  #ad--adligô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to bind to, bind fast, bind_.

  #dê--dêligô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to bind to, tie, fasten_.

  #re--religô, âre, avî, âtus#, _to bind, fasten_.

#lîmen, inis#, n., _threshold, doorstep_.

#lîneâmentum, î# [#lînea#, _a line_], n., _a line_; _feature,
lineament_.

#lingua, ae#, f., _tongue_; _language_.

#liquefaciô, ere, fêcî, factus# [#liqueô#, _to be liquid_ + #faciô#],
_to melt, dissolve_.

#Lîternînus#, adj., _at Literum_, a town of Campania. As noun,
#Lîternînum, î# (sc. #praedium#, _an estate_), n., an estate of Scipio
Africanus Maior at Liternum.

#lîtigâtor, ôris# [#lîs#, _lawsuit_ + #agô#], m., _a party to a lawsuit,
litigant_.

#littera, ae#, f., _a letter_ (of the alphabet); in pl., _a letter,
epistle_; _literature_.

#litterâtus# [#littera#], adj., _lettered, educated, learned_.

#lîtus, oris#, n., (sea)_shore, beach, strand_.

#Lîvius, î#, m., gentile name of _M. Lîvius Salînâtor_, who commanded
the garrison of Tarentum during the second Punic War.

#locô, âre, âvî, âtus# [#locus#], _to place, put_; _contract for, let,
lease_.

  #con--conlocô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to place, arrange, station,
  establish_.

#locuplês, êtis# [#locus# + #plênus#], adj., _rich in lands, rich_.

#locus, î#, m. (pl., #locî# and #loca#), _a place, spot_; _locality,
region_; _position, station, post_; _room, opportunity_.

#longê# [#longus#], adv., _a long way_ or _distance, at a distance_;
_far, by far_.

#longinquus# [#longus#], adj., _remote, distant_.

#longus#, adj., _long_; _distant_.

#loquor, î, locûtus sum#, _to speak, talk, say_.

  #ad--adloquor, î, locûtus sum#, _to speak to, address_.

  #con--conloquor, î, locûtus sum#, _to talk with, converse, confer_.

#lôrîca, ae# [#lôrum#], f., _a corselet_ of leather, _coat of mail_;
#squâmârum lôrîca#, _armor-like covering of scales_.

#lôrum, î#, n., _a leather thong_ or _strap_.

#Lûcius, î#, m., a Roman praenomen.

#Lucrêtia, ae#, f., the wife of Collatinus, a type of the Roman matron
of the olden time.

#luctor, ârî, âtus sum#, _to wrestle, struggle_.

#lûctus, ûs# [#lûgeô#], m., _grief, sorrow, mourning_.

#Lûcullus, î#, m., _L. Licinius_, born about 110 B.C., consul 74;
conducted the war against Mithridates 74-67, after which he gave himself
to a life of luxury, dying in 57 or 56.

#lûcus, î#, m., _a sacred grove, grove_.

#lûdibrium, î# [#lûdus#], n., _laughing-stock, jest_; _mockery,
derision_.

#lûdicer, cra, crum# [#lûdus#], adj., _playful, sportive_.

#lûdus, î#, m., _play, sport_; _a game_, esp. (in pl.) _the public
games_, consisting of chariot races, gladiatorial combats, and
theatrical performances.

#lûgeô, êre, lûxî, lûctus#, _to grieve_; _grieve for, mourn, lament_.

#lûgubris, e# [#lûgeô#], adj., _mournful_.

#lûmen, inis# [cf. #lux#], n., _light_.

#lûna, ae# [cf. #lûx#], f., _the moon_.

#lupa, ae#, f., _a she-wolf_.

#lûstrô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to purify, cleanse_; _to review, inspect_.

#lûx, lûcis#, f., _light, daylight, day_; #prîmâ lûce#, _at dawn_.

#lûxuria, ae# [#lûxus#], f., _luxury, excess_.

#lûxus, ûs#, m., _excess, luxury, self-indulgence_.


#M#

#Macedô, onis#, m., _a Macedonian_.

#Macedonia, ae#, f., _Macedonia_, an extensive country north of Greece.
Its inhabitants were not generally reckoned as Greeks. Under Alexander
the Great it became the chief power of the ancient world.

#mâchina, ae#, f., _machine_ or _engine of war_; _a contrivance, trick_.

#mactô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to offer as sacrifice, kill, slaughter_.

#mactus#, adj., _worshiped, glorified_.

#Maecênâs, âtis#, m., _C. Cilnius_, the close friend of Augustus and his
chief adviser in civil affairs.

#maestus#, adj., _sad, gloomy, mournful_.

#magis#, comp., adv., _in a greater degree_; _more, rather_; sup.
#mâximê# [#mâximus#], _in the highest degree, particularly_;
_exceedingly, very_.

#magister, trî#, m., _master, chief_; _teacher_; #magister equitum#,
_Master of the Horse_, an officer appointed by a dictator as his
lieutenant. The name perhaps indicates that he had especial command of
the cavalry.

#magistrâtus, ûs# [#magister#], m., _civil office, magistracy_.

#mâgnificê# [#mâgnificus#], adv., in good sense, _grandly_; in bad
sense, _in lordly fashion, haughtily, proudly_.

#mâgnificentia, ae# [#mâgnificus#], f., _splendor, grandeur_.

#mâgnificus# [#mâgnus# + #faciô#], adj., _splendid, magnificent_.

#mâgnitûdô, inis# [#mâgnus#], f., _greatness, size_.

#mâgnus#, comp. #mâior#, sup. #mâximus#, adj., _great, large_; #mâior#
or #mâximus# (sc. #nâtû#), _elder, eldest_. As noun, #Mâgnus, î#, m.,
_the Great_, cognomen of Pompey; #mâiôrês# (sc. #nâtû#), pl. m.,
_ancestors_.

#Maharbal, alis#, m., _a Carthaginian general_.

#mâiestâs, âtis# [cf. #mâior#], f., _greatness, dignity_.

#mâior, mâius#, gen. #mâiôris#, see #mâgnus#.

#male# [#malus#], comp. #pêius#, sup. #pessimê#, adv., _badly, ill,
unsuccessfully_; _feebly, barely, scarcely_.

#maledictum, î# [#male# + #dîcô#], n., _a curse_.

#mâlô, mâlle, mâluî# [#magis# + (1) #volô#], _to prefer_.

#malus#, comp. #pêior#, sup. #pessimus#, adj., _bad, wicked_; _evil,
unfortunate_. As noun, #malum, î#, n., _evil, misfortune, trouble_.

#Mâmurius, î#, m., a Roman smith of the time of King Numa.

#mandâtum, î# [#mandô#], n., _an order, command_.

#mandô, âre, âvî, âtus# [#manus# + #dô#], _to hand over, commit,
entrust_; _order, command_; #lîtterîs mandâre#, _to write_.

  #con--commendô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to commit, entrust_; _assist,
  defend_.

#mâne#, adv., _early in the morning_.

#maneô, êre, mânsî, mânsûrus#, _to remain, stay, tarry_.

  #re--remaneô, êre, mânsî, mânsûrus#, _to stay behind, remain_.

#Mânês, ium#, pl. m., _the deified spirits of the dead_, to whom
sacrifice was regularly made.

#manifêstus# [#manus# + #*fendô#], adj., _clear, manifest, evident_;
_exposed_.

#manipulus, î# [#manus# + #*pleô#] m., _a company of soldiers, maniple_
(one third of a cohort). The standard of the maniple orig. bore (it is
said) a _handful_ of hay.

#Mânius, î#, m., abbreviated #M'.#, a Roman praenomen.

#Mânliânus#, adj., _Manlian_.

#Mânlius, î#, m., the name of a Roman gens. See #Torquâtus#.

#mânô, âre, âvî, --#, _to flow, trickle_; _to flow_ or _stream abroad,
spread_.

#mânsuêtûdô, inis# [#mânsuêtus#, _tame_], f., _mildness, gentleness_.

#manubiae, ârum# [#manus#], pl. f., _prize-money, booty, plunder_.

#manûmittô, ere, mîsî, missus# [#manus# + #mittô#], _to set free,
emancipate_.

#manus, ûs#, f., _hand, arm_; #ferreae manûs#, _grappling irons_ (see
#corvus#); _force, strength, prowess_; _band, troop_; #manûs cônserere#,
_to join battle_.

#Mârcus, î#, m., a common praenomen.

#Mârcius, î#, m., see #Ancus#.

#mare, is#, n., _the sea_; #Mare Superum#, _the Upper_ or _Adriatic
Sea_.

#margarîta, ae#, f., _a pearl_.

#maritimus# [#mare#], adj., _pertaining to the sea, sea, maritime_.

#marîtus, î#, m., _husband_.

#Marius, î#, m., _C._, born near Arpinum in Latium, 107 B.C.; conquered
Jugurtha, 106; was seven times consul; defeated Teutones in 102, Cimbri
in 101; died in 86.

#marmor, oris#, n., _marble_.

#marmoreus# [#marmor#], adj., _marble, of marble_.

#Mârs, Mârtis#, m., _Mars_, the Roman god of war; _war, battle_.

#Mârtius# [#Mârs#], adj., _of March_.

#Masinissa, ae#, m., king of Numidia, ally of Scipio Africanus Maior, in
Africa, B.C. 202. He reigned till 148.

#Massîva, ae#, m., nephew of Masinissa.

#mâter, mâtris#, f., _mother_.

#mâternus# [#mâter#], adj., _of a mother, mother's_; _maternal, on the
mother's side_.

#mâtrimônium, î# [#mâter#], n., _marriage_.

#mâtrôna, ae# [#mâter#], f., _a married woman, wife, matron_.

#Maurî, ôrum#, pl. m., _Moors_, inhabitants of Mauretania, the modern
Morocco.

#mâximê# [#mâximus#], adv., see #magis#.

#mâximus#, adj., see #mâgnus#.

#Mâximus, î#, m., a Roman cognomen.

  1. _M. Valerius Mâximus Corvînus_, consul 343 B.C.

  2. _Q. Fabius Mâximus_, a famous general opposed to Hannibal,
  surnamed _Cunctâtor_, from his caution. He was five times consul,
  and died in 203.

#medicâmentum, î# [#medicô#, _to heal_], n., _drug, potion_; _antidote,
cure_.

#medicus, î# [#medeor#, _to heal_], m., _a physician, surgeon, doctor_.

#meditor, ârî, âtus sum#, _to reflect upon, consider_; _plan, devise_.

#medius#, adj., _in the middle, middle, midst of_. As noun, #medium, î#,
n., _the middle, midst, intervening space_; #in mediô#, _in the midst
of, between_; #in medium prôferre#, _to bring out, produce_.

#melior, ius#, gen. #ôris#, adj., see #bonus#.

#melius#, adv., see #bene#.

#Memmius, î#, m., gentile name of _C. Memmius Gemellus_, an opponent of
Julius Caesar.

#memorâbilis, e# [#memorô#], adj., _worth telling, remarkable_.

#memoria, ae# [#memor#, _mindful_], f., _memory_; _record, account_.

#memorô, âre, âvî, âtus# [#memor#, _mindful_], _to bring to mind,
relate_; _say, tell_.

#mêns, mentis#, f., _the mind, intellectual faculties_; _thought,
purpose_.

#mênsa, ae#, f., _table_; _course_ (at dinner).

#mênsis, is#, m., _a month_.

#mentiô, ônis#, f., _mention_.

#mercor, ârî, âtus sum# [#merx#], _to buy, purchase_.

#mereô, êre, uî, itus#, _to earn, deserve, merit_.

#mergô, ere, mersî, mersus#, _to dip, plunge in_; _sink_.

#meritô# [#meritum#, _desert_], adv., _deservedly, justly_.

#merx, mercis#, f., _goods, wares, merchandise_.

#Metellus, î#, m., a Roman cognomen.

  1. _L. Caecilius Metellus_, one of the young nobles who, after the
  battle of Cannae, proposed to leave Italy.

  2. _Q. Caecilius Metellus_, called _Numidicus_, because of the
  success with which he carried on the Jugurthine War, till superseded
  by Marius.

  3. _Q. Caecilius Metellus Pius_, consul B.C. 80. He fought against
  Sertorius.

#mêtor, ârî, âtus sum#, _to measure off, mark out_.

#Mettius, î#, m., see #Fûfetius#.

#metus, ûs#, m., _fear, dread, terror_.

#meus#, adj., _my, mine_. As noun, #meî, meôrum#, pl. m., _my friends,
my followers_.

#mî#, vocative sing. of #meus#.

#micô, âre, uî, --#, _to quiver, flash, gleam_.

#migrô, âre, âvî, âtum#, _to remove, migrate_.

  #con--commigrô, âre, âvî, âtum#, _to change one's home, move,
  migrate_.

  #re--remigrô, âre, âvî, âtum#, _to journey_ (back), _return_.

#mîles, itis#, m., _a soldier, fellow-soldier_; as collective noun,
_soldiery_.

#Mîlêtus, î#, f., a city in Asia Minor, near Ephesus.

#mîlitâris, e# [#mîles#], adj., _soldierly, military_; #rês mîlitâris#,
_the art of war, military tactics_.

#mîlitia, ae# [#mîles#], f., _military service, war_; #mîlitiae#, loc.,
_in the field, abroad_, opposed to #domî#, _at home_.

#mîlitô, âre, âvî, âtum#, _to be a soldier, serve in war, fight_.

#mîlle#, indecl. adj., _a thousand_; as noun, #mîlia#, pl. n.,
_thousands_.

#mîlliês# [#mîlle#], adv., _a thousand times_.

#mîmus, î#, m., _farce, comedy_.

#minimê# [#minimus#], adv., see #parum#.

#minister, trî#, m., _attendant, servant_.

#minitor, ârî, âtus sum# [freq. of #minor#], _to threaten_.

#minor, us#, gen. #ôris#, see #parvus#.

#minor, ârî, âtus sum#, _to threaten_.

#Minucius, î#, m., _M. Minucius Rûfus, magister equitum_ under Q. Fabius
Maximus.

#Minturnae, ârum#, pl. f., a town between Campania and Latium.

#minuô, ere, î, ûtus# [#minus#], _to diminish, lessen_; _weaken_.

#minus#, adv., see #parum#.

#mîrâbilis, e# [#mîror#], adj., _wonderful, strange, amazing_.

#mîrâculum, î# [#mîror#], n., _a wonder, marvel, miracle_.

#mîrificus# [#mîrus# + #faciô#], adj., _wonderful_.

#mîror, ârî, âtus sum#, _to wonder, marvel at_.

#mîrus#, adj., _wonderful, marvelous_.

#miser, era, erum#, adj., _wretched, unfortunate_.

#misericordia, ae# [#misericors#], f., _pity, compassion, mercy_.

#misericors, cordis# [#misereô#, _to pity_ + #cor#, _heart_], adj.,
_tender-hearted, merciful_.

#missiô, ônis# [#mittô#], f., _release from service, discharge_.

#Mithridâtês#, is, m., surnamed _the Great_, king of Pontus, B.C.
120-63.

#Mithridâticus#, adj., _Mithridatic_.

#mîtigô, âre, âvî, âtus# [#mîtis# + #agô#], _to make gentle, soften,
civilize_.

#mîtis, e#, adj., _mild, gentle, kind_.

#mittô, ere, mîsî, missus#, _send, despatch, dismiss_; _throw, hurl,
shoot_.

  #ab--âmittô, ere, mîsî, missus#, _to send away, let go, lose_.

  #ad--admittô, ere, mîsî, missus#, _to admit, receive_.

  #con--committô, ere, mîsî, missus#, _to send_ or _bring together,
  join_; _entrust, commit, bring_ (it) _about, cause, allow_; #pûgnam#
  or #proelium committere#, _to begin battle_.

  #dê--dêmittô, ere, mîsî, missus#, _to send_ or _let down, cast down,
  let fall_; _put_.

  #dis--dîmittô, ere, mîsî, missus#, _to send_ (away), _dismiss_;
  _give up, abandon_.

  #ex--êmittô, ere, mîsî, missus#, _to send forth_ or _out_; _hurl,
  cast_; _utter_; _let loose_.

  #in--immittô, ere, mîsî, missus#, _to send in, admit_; _send, hurl_.

  #ob--omittô, ere, mîsî, missus#, _to lay aside_; _neglect, omit_;
  _pass over, say nothing of_; _lose sight of, let slip_.

  #per--permittô, ere, mîsî, missus#, _to let pass_; _permit, allow_.

  #prô--prômittô, ere, mîsî, missus#, _to put forward_; _promise_.

  #re--remittô, ere, mîsî, missus#, _to send back_; _yield, give up_;
  _remit, grant exemption from_.

  #re + prô--reprômittô, ere, mîsî, missus#, _to promise in return_.

  #sub--submittô, ere, mîsî, missus#, _to send_ or _let down_; _let
  grow_.

  #trâns--trânsmittô, ere, mîsî, missus#, _to send_ or _put across_,
  _make to cross_; _despatch_; intrans., _to go across, cross_.

#Mitylênae, ârum#, pl. f., capital of Lesbos, an island in the Aegean
Sea.

#moderâtiô, ônis# [#moderor#, _to set bounds to_], f., _self-control,
moderation_.

#moderâtus# [#moderor#, _to check_], adj., _within bounds, moderate,
merciful_.

#modicus# [#modus#], adj., _moderate, modest_.

#modius, î# [#modus#], m., _a measure_; _a peck_.

#modo# [#modus#], adv., _only_; _just now, lately_; #modo . . . modo#,
_at one time . . . at another, now . . . now_; #nôn; modo . . . sed
etiam#, _not only . . . but also_.

#modus, î#, m., _measure, limit, end_; _way, manner_; _measure, strains_
(of music).

#moenia, ium#, pl. n., _defensive walls, city walls, fortifications_.

#môlês, is#, f., _mass, weight, bulk_; _massive structure_.

#molestê# [#molestus#], adv., _with difficulty_ or _vexation_; #aegrê#
or #molestê ferre#, _to take amiss, be vexed_ (at).

#molestia, ae# [#molestus#], f., _trouble, annoyance, burden_.

#molestus# [#môlês#], adj., _troublesome, annoying, vexatious_.

#môlior, îrî, îtus sum# [#môlês#], _to struggle, toil_; _undertake,
attempt_.

#mollis, e#, adj., _soft, tender_; _effeminate, unmanly_.

#molliter# [#mollis#], adv., _effeminately, luxuriously_.

#Molô, ônis#, m., see #Apollônius#.

#mômentum, î# [#moveô#], n., _movement_; _cause, circumstance_;
(sc. #temporis#), _moment, instant_.

#moneô, êre, uî, itus#, _to remind, admonish_; _advise, warn_.

  #ad--admoneô, êre, uî, itus#, _to remind, admonish, warn_.

#monitus, ûs# [#moneô#], m., _warning, counsel_.

#môns, montis#, m., _a mountain, height, hill_.

#mônstrum, î# [#moneô#], n., _a warning, omen_; _strange being,
monster_.

#mora, ae#, f., _delay, policy of delay_.

#morbus, î#, m., _sickness, disease_.

#morior, morî, mortuus sum#, _to die_.

#moror, ârî, âtus sum#, _to delay, linger, tarry_; with acc., _to
hinder, impede_.

  #dê--dêmoror, ârî, âtus sum#, _to linger, tarry, remain_.

#mors, mortis#, f., _death_.

#morsus, ûs# [#mordeô#, _to bite_], m., _bite_; _pain, sting, agony_.

#mortâlis, e# [#mors#], adj., _mortal, human_; as noun, _mortâlis, is_,
m., _a man, mortal_.

#mortuus# [part. of #morior#], adj., _dead_.

#môs, môris#, m., _a habit, custom_; _manner, fashion_; pl., _customs,
character_.

#môtus, ûs# [#moveô#], m., _movement, agitation, tumult, insurrection_.

#moveô, êre, môvî, môtus#, _to stir, move, remove_; _affect, arouse_.

  #ab--âmoveô, êre, môvî, môtus#, _to take away, remove_.

  #ad--admoveô, êre, môvî, môtus#, _to move towards_; _bring near_;
  _offer_.

  #con--commoveô, êre, môvî, môtus#, _to move thoroughly_; _agitate,
  excite_.

  #per--permoveô, êre, môvî, môtus#, _to move deeply, excite,
  influence_.

  #prô--prômoveô, êre, môvî, môtus#, _to move forward, promote,
  advance_.

  #sub--submoveô, êre, môvî, môtus#, _to thrust aside, remove,
  dislodge_.

#mox#, adv., _soon, presently_; _thereupon, next_.

#mûcrô, ônis#, m., _sword-point, sword_.

#muliebriter# [#muliebris#, _womanish_], adv., _like a woman, in
womanish fashion_.

#mulier, ieris#, f., _a woman, wife_.

#muliercula, ae# [dim. of #mulier#], f., a (little, i.e.) _young woman,
girl_.

#mûliô, ônis# [#mûlus#, _a mule_], m., _a mule-driver_.

#multa, ae#, f., _a fine, penalty_.

#multiplex, icis# [#multus# + #plicô#, _to fold_], adj., _manifold,
many_.

#multitûdô, inis# [#multus#], f., _a multitude, throng_.

#multô# [#multus#], adv., _by far, much_.

#multô, âre, âvî, âtus# [#multa#], _to fine, punish_.

#multum# [#multus#], adv., _much_; _greatly, severely_.

#multus#, comp. #plûs#, sup. #plûrimus#, adj., _much, many a_; in pl.,
_many_; #plûrês#, _several_; often used as noun in all three degrees.

#munditia, ae# [#mundus#, _neat_], f., _neatness, elegance, niceness_.

#mûniô, îre, îvî (iî), îtus#, _to fortify, protect_; _open up, build_
(a road).

  #con--commûniô, îre, îvî (iî), îtus#, _to fortify strongly,
  intrench_.

#mûnus, eris#, n., _service_; _present, gift_.

#muraena, ae#, f., _an eel_.

#mûrus, î#, m., _city wall, wall_.

#Mûsae, ârum#, pl. f., _the Muses_, the goddesses of the liberal arts,
esp. music and poetry.

#Mutina, ae#, f., _Mutina_ (now Modena), a city in Cisalpine Gaul, south
of the Po.

#Mutinênsis, e#, adj., _of_ or _at Mutina_.

#mûtô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to change, alter_.

  #con--commûtô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to alter, change_; _exchange_.

  #per--permûtô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to change throughout, exchange,
  interchange_.

#mûtuus# [#mûtô#], adj., _mutual_.


#N#

#nam#, conj. (1) causal, _for, because, inasmuch as_; (2) explanatory,
_you know, indeed_.

#nancîscor, î, nactus sum#, _to get_ (by accident), _happen upon, find,
meet with_.

#nârrô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to narrate, tell_.

#nâscor, î, nâtus sum#, _to be born_; _spring from, arise_.

#Nâsîca, ae#, m., cognomen of _P. Cornêlius Scîpiô Nâsîca Serâpiô_,
opponent of Tiberius Gracchus.

#nâsus, î#, m., _the nose_.

#nâtiô, ônis# [#nâscor#], f., _birth, race_; _tribe, nation, people_.

#nâtûra, ae# [#nâscor#], f., _nature, character, disposition_;
personified, _Nature_.

#nâtus# [orig. part. of #nâscor#], adj., lit. _born_; with #annôs#,
_old_.

(#nâtus, ûs#) [#nâscor#], m., _birth, age_ (found only in abl. sing.).

#naufragium, î# [#nâvis# + #frangô#], n., _shipwreck_.

#nâvâlis, e# [#nâvis#], adj., _naval_.

#nâvicula, ae# [dim. of #nâvis#], f., _a small vessel, boat, skiff_.

#nâvigâtiô, ônis# [#nâvigô#, _to sail_], f., _voyage_.

#nâvigium, î# [#nâvigô#, _to sail_], n., _ship, boat_.

#nâvis, is#, f., _a ship_.

#Nâvius, î#, m., see #Attus#.

#nâvô, âre, âvî, âtus# [#(g)nâvus#, _busy_], _to do with zeal_; #operam
nâvâre#, _to render vigorous aid, act with vigor_.

#nê#, (1) adv., _not_; #nê . . . quidem#, _not even, not at all_;
(2) conj., _in order that not, not to, for fear that, lest_.

#ne#, enclitic interrog. particle, used (1) in direct questions, and
then translatable only by the inflection of the voice; (2) as conj. with
indirect questions, _whether_.

#nebulô, ônis# [#nebula#, _mist_], m., _a worthless fellow,
good-for-naught, scamp_.

#nec#, see #neque#.

#necessârius# [#necesse#, _necessary_], adj., _necessary,
indispensable_.

#necessitâs, âtis# [#necesse#, _necessary_], f., _necessity_.

#necô, âre, âvî, âtus# [#nex#], _to kill, slay_.

#nefârius# [#nefâs#, _a crime_], adj., _wicked, impious, nefarious_.

#nefâstus# [#nefâs#, _a crime_], adj., _unhallowed_; #diês nefâstus#,
a day on which no public business could be transacted.

#neglegêns, entis# [orig. part. of #neglegô#], adj., _heedless,
careless_.

#neglegô, ere, lêxî, lêctus# [#nec# + #legô#], _to disregard, despise,
neglect_.

#negô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to say no_; _deny, refuse_.

  #dê--dênegô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to say no, deny_; _refuse, reject_.

#nêmô#, gen. #nûllîus#, dat. #nêminî#, acc. #nêminem#, abl. #nûllô#; pl.
not found [#nê# + #homô#], m. and f., _no one, nobody_.

#nemus, oris#, n., _a grove_.

#nepôs, ôtis#, m., _grandson, descendant_.

#neptis, is#, f., _granddaughter_.

#neque# or #nec# [#nê# + #que#], adv. and conj., _and not, but not, nor,
nor yet_; #neque# or #nec . . . neque# or #nec#, _neither . . . nor_.

#nequeô, îre, îvî, --# [#nê# + #queô#, _to be able_], _to be unable_.

#nê . . . quidem#, see #nê#.

#nesciô, îre, îvî (iî), --# [#nê# + #sciô#], _not know, to be ignorant_.

#neuter, tra, trum# [#nê# + #uter#], adj., _neither_.

#nex, necis#, f., _death_; _murder, slaughter_.

#nî#, conj., _if not, unless_.

#niger, gra, grum#, adj., _black_.

#nihil# or #nîl# [#nê# + #hîlum#, _a trifle_], n. indecl., _nothing_;
acc. often as adv., _in no wise, not at all, not_.

#nihilum, î# [older form of #nihil#], n., _nothing_; abl. #nihilô#, as
adv., _not at all_; #nihilô minus#, _none the less_.

#nihildum# [#nihil# + (1) #dum#], n. indecl., _nothing as yet_.

#Nîlus, î#, m., _the river Nile_.

#nîmîrum#, adv., _without doubt, surely, truly, plainly_.

#nimium# [#nimius#], adv., _excessively_.

#nimius#, adj., _beyond measure, excessive, too much, too great_.

#nisi# [#nê# + #sî#], conj., _if not, unless, except_.

#niteô, êre, uî, --#, _to shine, glitter_; _be conspicuous, flourish_.

  #ex--êniteô, êre, uî, --#, _to shine forth_; _be distinguished_.

#nîtor, î, nîsus# or #nîxus sum#, _lean_ or _rest upon_; _to exert one's
self, strive_.

#ex--ênîtor, î, nîsus# or #nîxus sum#, _to strive, struggle_.

#in--innîtor, î, nîsus# or #nîxus sum#, _to lean upon, support one's
self by_.

#nô, nâre, nâvî, --#, _to swim_.

#trâns--trânô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to swim across_.

#nôbilis, e# [#nôscô#], adj., _known, noted, famous_; _high-born,
noble_.

#nôbilitâs, âtis# [#nôbilis#], f., _fame, renown_; _high birth_; _the
nobility, nobles_.

#nôbilitô, âre, âvî, âtus# [#nôbilis#], _to make known_ or _famous,
glorify, dignify_.

#noceo, êre, uî, itûrus#, _to hurt, injure_.

#noctû# [abl. of #*noctus# = #nox#], adv., _by night_.

#noctua, ae# [#nox#], f., _night-owl, owl_.

#nocturnus# [#nox#], adj., _of_ or _by night, nocturnal_.

#Nôla, ae#, f., a town of Campania.

#nôlô, nôlle, nôluî, --# [#nôn# + (1) #volô#], _to be unwilling, not
wish_.

#nômen, inis# [#nôscô#], n., _a name_, esp. the gentile name; #nômina
dare# or #profitêrî#, _to volunteer_.

#nôminô, âre, âvî, âtus# [#nômen#], _to name, designate_.

#nôn# [#nê# + #oenum# = #ûnum#], adv., _not, not at all_.

#nônâgintâ#, indecl. num. adj., _ninety_.

#nôndum# [#nôn# + (1) #dum#], adv., _not yet_.

#nônnûllus# [#nôn# + #nûllus#], adj., _some, several_.

#nônnumquam# [#nôn# + #numquam#], adv., _sometimes, at times_.

#nôscô, ere, nôvî, nôtus#, _to come to know, become acquainted with_; in
perf., plup.; and fut. perf., _to know_.

  #ad--âgnôscô, ere, gnôvî, gnitus#, _to recognize_.

  #con--côgnôscô, ere, cognôvî, côgnitus#, _to learn, perceive,
  understand_.

  #in--îgnôscô, ere, îgnôvî, îgnôtus#, _to overlook, pardon, forgive_.

#nota, ae# [cf. #nôscô#], f., _a mark, sign_.

#nôtus# [orig. part. of #nôscô#], adj., _well-known, familiar_.

#novâcula, ae#, f., _a razor_.

#novem#, indecl. num. adj., _nine_.

#novus#, adj., _new, fresh, young, recent_.

#nox, noctis#, f., _night_.

#nûbês, is#, f., _a cloud_.

#nûbô, ere, nûpsî, nûptum#, _to veil one's self, be married, wed_.

#nûdô, âre, âvî, âtus# [#nûdus#], _to strip, bare_.

#nûdus#, adj., _naked, lightly clad_.

#nûllus#, gen. #nûllîus#, dat. #nûllî# [#nê# + #ûllus#], adj., _none,
no_; as noun, _no one_.

#num#, interrog. particle, used (1) in direct questions expecting a
negative answer, _not so . . . is it?_ (2) in indir. questions,
_whether, if_.

#Numa, ae#, m., see #Pompilius#.

#numerô, âre, âvî, âtus# [#numerus#], _to count out_ (money), _pay_.

#numerus, î#, m., _number, quantity_.

#Numida, ae#, m., _a Numidian_.

#Numidia, ae#, f., a country of Northern Africa, west of Carthage; now
Algiers.

#Numidicus#, adj., _Numidian_.

#Numitor, ôris#, m., king of Alba Longa, grandfather of Romulus.

#nummus, î#, m., _a piece of money, coin_, esp. the #sêstertius#. See
#sêstertius#.

#numquam# [#nê# + #umquam#, _ever_], adv., _never_.

#nunc#, adv., _at the present moment, now_.

#nûntiô, âre, âvî, âtus# [#nûntius#], _to announce, inform, report_;
_bid, urge, direct_.

  #dê--dênûntiô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to announce, declare, proclaim_.

  #prô--prônûntiô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to announce, declare_.

  #re--renûntiô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to send_ or _bring back word,
  report, announce_; with dat., _to refuse, decline_.

#nûntius, î#, m., _a messenger_; _message tidings_.

#*nuô, nuere#, _to nod_.

  #ab--abnuô, ere, î, --#, _to refuse_.

  #ad--adnuô, ere, î, --#, _to nod assent to, agree to_; _agree,
  promise_.

  #in--innuô, ere, î, --#, _to signal by a nod, hint, intimate_.

  #re--renuô, ere, î, --#, _to nod refusal, refuse_.

#nûper#, adv., _lately, recently_.

#nurus, ûs#, f., _a daughter-in-law_.

#nûsquam# [#nê# + #ûsquam#], adv., _nowhere, in no place_.

#nûtô, âre, âvî, âtum# [freq. of #*nuô#], _to nod_; of an army, _to
waver, be ready to give way_.

#nûtrîx, îcis# [#nûtriô#, _to nourish_], f., _a nurse_.


#O#

#ob#, prep. with acc., _to, towards_; _for, on account of, by reason
of_; in composition, _towards, against, at, before_.

#obeô#, see (1) #eô#.

#obiciô#, see #iaciô#.

#obiûrgô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to berate, scold_.

#oblinô, ere, lêvî, litus# [#ob# + #linô#, _to smear_], _to daub, smear,
defile_.

#oblitus#, see #oblinô#.

#oblîtus#, see #oblîvîscor#.

#oblîviô, ônis# [cf. #oblîvîscor#], f., _forgetfulness_.

#oblîvîscor, î, oblîtus sum#, _to forget_.

#obnoxius# [#ob# + #noxa#, _harm_], adj., _liable to punishment_;
_liable, exposed_.

#obruô#, see #ruô#.

#obsequor#, see #sequor#.

#obses, idis#, m., _a hostage, surety_.

#obsideô#, see #sedeô#.

#obsidiô, ônis# [#obsideô#], f., _a siege_.

#obsistô#, see #sistô#.

#obstrepô, ere, uî, --# [#ob# + #strepô#, _to make a noise_], _to rail
at, roar at_.

#obstupêscô, ere, stupuî, --#, _to become amazed, be struck dumb_.

#obtineô#, see #teneô#.

#obtingô#, see #tangô#.

#obtrêctâtor, ôris# [#obtrêctô#, _to under-rate_], m., _detractor,
traducer_.

#obtruncô, âre, --, âtus# [#ob# + #truncô#, _to maim_; cf. #truncus#],
_to lop off_; _kill, slay_.

#obveniô#, see #veniô#.

#obviam# [#ob# + #via#], adv., _across one's path, in the way, towards_;
#obviam îre, prôgredî# or #venîre#, _to go to meet_; #obviam esse# or
#fierî#, _to meet_.

#obvius# [#ob# + #via#], adj., _in the way, meeting_; with #esse,
fierî#, or #venîre#, _to meet_.

#obvolvô, ere, î, volûtus# [#ob# + #volvô#, _to roll_], _to wrap round,
envelop, cover_.

#occâsiô, ônis# [#occidô#], f., _fitting time, opportunity, chance_.

#occâsus, ûs# [#occidô#], m., _downfall_.

#occidô#, see #cadô#.

#occîdô#, see #caedô#.

#occumbô#, see #*cumbô#.

#occupô, âre, âvî, âtus# [#ob# + #capiô#], _to take possession of,
seize_; _attack_.

#occurrô#, see #currô#.

#Octâvia, ae#, f., _sister of Octavianus_.

#Octâviânus, î#, m., see #Augustus# and #Caesar#.

#octô#, indecl. num. adj., _eight_.

#octôgintâ#, indecl. num. adj., _eighty_.

#oculus, î#, m., _the eye_.

#odium, î#, n., _hatred, grudge, aversion_.

#odor, ôris#, m., _smell, perfume_.

#offendô#, see #*fendô#.

#offênsus# [orig. part. of #offendô#], adj., _vexed, displeased,
offended_.

#offerô#, see #ferô#.

#officiôsus# [#officium#], adj., _courteous, obliging_.

#officium, î# [#opus# + #faciô#], n., _service, kindness, favor_; _duty,
office_.

#ôlim# [#ole#, old form of #ille#], adv., _formerly_.

#omittô#, see #mittô#.

#omnînô# [#omnis#], adv., _in all, altogether_.

#omnis, e#, adj., _each, every, all, the whole_; #omnês ad ûnum#, _all
to a man_.

#opera, ae# [#opus#], f., _work, labor, pains, aid_; #operam dare#, _to
devote pains to_; #operam nâvâre#, see #nâvô#.

#opifex, ficis# [#opus# + #faciô#], m., _workman, artisan_.

#Opîmius, î#, m., _Lûcius_, consul 121 B.C., and opponent of
C. Gracchus.

#opîniô, ônis# [#opînor#, _to think_], f., _opinion, fancy, belief_.

#oportet, êre, uit#, impers., _it is necessary_ or _proper, it befits_.

#oppidum, î#, n., _a walled town, city_.

#oppleô#, see #*pleô#.

#oppônô#, see #pônô#.

#opportûnus#, adj., _fit, suitable, convenient_.

#opprimô#, see #premô#.

#oppûgnâtiô, ônis# [#oppûgnô#], f., _assault, attack, siege, storming_.

#oppûgnô#, see #pûgnô#.

#(ops), opîs#, f., _aid, help_; in pl., _power, influence_; _means,
wealth_.

#optimâtês, um# or #ium# [#optimus#], pl. m., _the aristocrats, the
nobles_.

#optimus#, see #bonus#.

#optiô, ônis# [#optô#], f., _choice, option_.

#optô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to choose, select_; _wish_ or _pray for,
desire_.

  #ad--adoptô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to take to one's self by choice,
  adopt_.

#opulentus# [#ops#], adj., _rich, wealthy_.

#opus, eris#, n., _work, labor_; _need, necessity_; #opus est# with
abl., _there is need of_; #mâgnô opere#, _greatly_; #tantô opere#, _so
greatly_.

#ôrâculum, î# [#ôrô#], n., _an oracle_; _a prophecy_.

#ôrâtiô, ônis# [#ôrô#], f., _a speech, oration, discourse_.

#ôrâtor, ôris# [#ôrô#], m., _speaker, pleader, ambassador_.

#orbis, is#, m., _ring, circle, orbit_; #orbis terrârum# (or #orbis#
alone), _the world_.

#orbus#, adj., _bereft_ (of parents or children), _parentless,
childless_. As noun, #orbus, î#, m., _an orphan_.

#ôrdinô, âre, âvî, âtus# [#ôrdô#], _to set in order, arrange, adjust,
regulate_.

#ôrdior, îrî, ôrsus sum#, _to begin_.

#ôrdô, inis#, f., _row, series, arrangement, order_; _bank_ or _tier of
oars_; _class, rank_.

#oriêns, entis# [part. of #orior#], m. (sc. #sôl#), _the rising sun_;
_the East, Orient_.

#orior, îrî, tus sum#, _to arise, begin_; _to spring from, be descended
from_.

  #con--coorior, îrî, tus sum#, _to arise_.

  #ex--exorior, îrî, tus sum#, _to arise, rise, begin_.

#oriundus# [#orior#], adj., _descended, sprung from_.

#ôrnâmentum, î# [#ôrnô#], n., _preparation_; _decoration, ornament,
jewel_.

#ôrnâtus# [#ôrnô#], adj., _fitted out, equipped_; of men,
_distinguished, illustrious_.

#ôrnâtus, ûs# [#ôrnô#], m., _dress, fine attire_; _decoration,
ornament_.

#ôrnô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to fit out, equip_; _adorn, decorate,
beautify_.

  #ad--adôrnô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to equip, provide_; _adorn,
  beautify_.

  #sub--subôrnô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to incite secretly, bribe_.

#ôrô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to speak, plead, treat_; _entreat, beseech,
pray_.

  #ad--adôrô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to supplicate_; _worship, reverence_.

  #per--perôrô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to speak, plead_.

#ôs, ôris#, n., _mouth, face_.

#ôsculor, ârî, âtus sum# [#ôsculum#, _a kiss_], _to kiss_.

  #dê--deôsculor, ârî, âtus sum#, _to kiss_.

#ostendô#, see #tendô#.

#ostentô, âre, âvî, âtus# [freq. of #ostendô#], _to show, exhibit_.

#Ôstia, ae# [#ôs#], f., _Ostia_, a town at the Tiber's mouth, the
sea-port of Rome.

#ôtiôsê# [#ôtiôsus#], adv., _leisurely, idly_.

#ôtiôsus# [#ôtium#], adj., _at leisure, idle_; _in retirement_ (_i.e._,
not in office).

#ôtium, î#, n., _leisure, ease, idleness_.

#ovô, âre, --, --#, _to exult, rejoice_.


#P#

#P.#, abbreviation of the name _Pûblius_.

#pâcâtus# [#pâcô#, _to subdue_], adj., _pacified, subdued, at peace_.

#pacîscor, î, pactus sum#, _to agree together, bargain, stipulate_.

#paene#, adv., _almost, nearly_.

#paenitet, êre, uit, --#, impers., _it grieves, it repents_.

#palam#, adv., _openly, publicly_.

#Palâtium, î#, n., _the Palatine Hill_. Since Augustus had his palace
there, #palâtium# came to mean _palace_.

#pâlor, ârî, âtus sum#, _to roam abroad, scatter, straggle_.

#palpebrae, ârum#, pl. f., _the eyelids_.

#palûdâmentum, î#, n., _a military cloak, cloak_.

#pâlus, î#, m., _a stake, post_.

#palûs, ûdis#, f., _swamp, marsh, pool_.

#pandô, ere, î, passus#, _to spread out, unfold_.

#papâver, eris#, n., _poppy_.

#pâr, paris#, adj., _equal, like, similar_; _well-matched_. As noun, _an
equal, mate_.

#parâbilis, e# [#parô#], adj., _easily obtainable, readily procured_.

#parcô, ere, pepercî#, and #parsî, --#, _to spare_.

#parcus# [#parcô#], adj., _sparing, frugal, temperate_.

#parêns, entis# [part. of #pariô#], m. and f., _a parent, a father_ or
_mother_.

#pâreô, êre, uî, --#, _to appear_ (esp. in answer to a command), _obey_.

  #ad--appâreô, êre, uî, --#, _to become visible, appear_; _be plain_
  or _evident_.

#pariô, ere, peperî, partus#, _to give birth to, bring forth, produce_;
_acquire, obtain, procure_.

#ab--aperiô, îre, uî, tus#, _to uncover, bare_; _open, disclose_.

  #ad# + #op--adoperiô, îre, uî, tus#, _to cover, veil_.

  #con--comperiô, îre, î, tus#, _to find out, learn_.

  #re--reperiô, îre, repperî, repertus#, _to find_ (again), _meet
  with, discover_.

#pariter# [#pâr#], adv., _equally, alike_; _likewise_.

#parô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to make ready, prepare_; _resolve, plan_; _get,
acquire_.

  #con--comparô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to prepare, make ready_; _obtain,
  procure_.

#parricîdium, î# [#pater# + #caedô#], n., _murder of a father,
parricide_.

#pars, partis#, f., _a part, portion_; _direction_; _a side, faction,
political party_ (both sing. and pl.); _a character, role_ (esp.
in pl.).

#Parthî, ôrum#, pl. m., _the Parthians_, a people in Asia, southeast of
the Caspian Sea. In the second century B.C. they overran the country to
the east of the Euphrates. They were brave warriors and skillful
archers, and successfully resisted the Roman power.

#partim# [#pars#], adv., _partly_.

#partior, îrî, îtus sum# [#pars#], _to distribute, divide_.

#partus, ûs# [#pariô#], m., _a bringing forth, delivery, birth_.

#parum#, adv., _too little, not enough_; comp. #minus#, _less, by no
means, not_; sup. #minimê#, _least of all, by no means, not at all_. As
noun, #parum#, indecl. n., _too little, not enough_.

#parvulus# [dim. of #parvus#], adj., _very small, tiny_. As noun,
#parvulus, î#, m., _a small child, infant_.

#parvus#, adj., _little, small_; comp. #minor#, _smaller, less_;
_younger_ (sc. #nâtû#); sup. #minimus#, _smallest, least_.

#pâscô, ere, pâvî, pâstus#, _to feed_; of animals, _to graze, browse_
(esp. in pass. and supine).

#passim# [#passus#, part. of #pandô#], adv., _in every direction,
everywhere_.

#pâstor, ôris# [#pâscô#], m., _herdsman, shepherd_.

#patefaciô# [#pateô# + #faciô#], _to lay open, disclose, bring to
light_.

#pateô, êre, uî, --#, _to be open_.

#pater, patris#, m., _father_; pl., #patrês# or #patrês cônscrîptî#,
_the senators_. See #cônscrîptus#.

#paternus# [#pater#], adj., _of a father, fatherly, father's_.

#patiêns, entis# [#patior#], adj., _able to endure, long suffering,
patient_.

#patior, î, passus sum#, _to suffer, bear, endure_; _experience_;
_allow, permit_.

#patria, ae# [#pater#], f., _fatherland, native land_.

#patricius# [#pater#], adj., _of fatherly dignity, patrician, noble_. As
noun, #patriciî, ôrum#, pl. m., _the nobles, patricians_, the
descendants of the orig. settlers of Rome.

#patrimônium, î# [#pater#], n., _inheritance, patrimony, property_.

#patrius# [#pater#], adj., _of a father, father's_.

#patrô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to carry out, perform, execute_.

#patrônus, î# [#pater#], m., _defender, patron_; _pleader, advocate,
lawyer_.

#paucus#, adj., _few, little_ (chiefly in pl.).

#paulâtim# [#paulum#], adv., _little by little, by degrees, gradually_.

#paulô# and #paulum# [#paulus#, _little_], adv., _by a little,
somewhat_.

#Paulus, î#, m., _L. Aemilius_, a famous general, consul in 219 and 216
B.C. In the latter year he fell at Cannae, and was hence regarded as a
national hero.

#pauper, eris#, adj., _poor_; _scanty, small_.

#pauperculus# [dim. of #pauper#], adj., _quite poor_.

#pavidus# [#paveô#, _to be afraid_], adj., _trembling, fearful,
frightened_.

#pavor, ôris# [#paveô#, _to be afraid_], m., _terror, fear, dread_.

#pâx, pâcis#, f., _peace_; _treaty_.

#peccâtum, î# [#peccô#], n., _an error, fault, sin_.

#peccô, âre, âvî, âtum#, _to do wrong, act amiss, err, sin_.

#pectus, oris#, n., _breast, bosom, heart_.

#pecûnia, ae# [#pecus#], f., _money, property_.

#pecus, oris#, n., _cattle, flock, herd_.

#pedes, itis# [#pês#], m., _a foot-soldier_; collectively,
_foot-soldiers, infantry_.

#pellô, ere, pepulî, pulsus#, _to drive out_ or _away, expel_; _defeat,
rout_.

  #ad--#(1) #appellô, ere, pulî, pulsus#, _to drive towards, steer
  for, direct_.

  #ad--#(2) #appellô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to call_ (by name), _address_;
  _appeal to, call upon_; _name, term, mention_.

  #con--#(1) #compellô, ere, pulî, pulsus#, _to drive together_;
  _force, compel_.

  #con--#(2) #compellô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to address_.

  #dê--dêpellô, ere, pulî, pulsus#, _to drive out_ or _away, expel,
  dislodge_.

  #ex--expellô, ere, pulî, pulsus#, _to drive out, expel, banish_.

  #per--perpellô, ere, pulî, pulsus#, _to drive, force, induce_.

  #prô--prôpellô, ere, pulî, pulsus#, _to drive forward_ or _away_;
  _incite_.

  #re--repellô, ere, reppulî, repulsus#, _to drive back, shake off,
  repulse, reject_.

#pendeô, êre, pependî, --#, _to hang, be suspended_; _hang one's self_.

#pendô, ere, pependî, pênsus#, _to weigh, pay_.

  #ex--expendô, ere, î, pênsus#, _to weigh_ or _pay out_.

  #re--rependô, ere, î, pênsus#, _to pay for, purchase_; used esp. of
  buying a thing with its weight in money.

#penitus#, adv., _inwardly, within_; _deeply, completely_.

#per#, prep. with acc.; used (1) of place, _through, across, over,
throughout_; (2) of time, _through, during_; (3) of means or agency, _by
means of, by the agency of, through_; (4) often in adv. phrases, #per
iocum#, _jokingly_, #per ôtium#, _quietly_, #per intervâlla#, _at
intervals_; in composition, _thoroughly, very_.

#peragô#, see #agô#.

#peragrô, âre, âvî, âtus# [#per# + #ager#], _to wander through, roam
over, traverse, scour_.

#peramoenus# [#per# + #amoenus#, _lovely_], adj., _very lovely,
charming_.

#percellô, ere, culî, culsus#, _to smite, strike_; _overturn, upset_;
_dishearten, discourage_.

#percieô, ciêre, cîvî, citus# [#per# + #cieô#, _to stir up_], _to arouse
thoroughly, excite_.

#percitus#, see #percieô#.

#percontor, ârî, âtus sum#, _to ask, question_.

#percussor, ôris# [#percutiô#], m., _murderer, assassin_.

#percutiô#, see #quatiô#.

#perdô#, see #dô#.

#perdûcô#, see #dûcô#.

#peregrînus# [#per# + #ager#], adj., _from foreign parts, foreign_.

#perendiê#, adv., _on the day after tomorrow_.

#perennis, e# [#per# + #annus#], adj., _perennial_; _perpetual,
never-failing_.

#pereô#, see (1) #eô#.

#perferô#, see #ferô#.

#perficiô#, see #faciô#.

#perfidia, ae# [#perfidus#], f., _treachery_.

#perfidus#, adj., _faithless, treacherous_.

#perforô, âre, âvî, âtus# [#per# + #forô#, _to bore_], _to bore through,
pierce_.

#perfruor#, see #fruor#.

#perfuga, ae# [#perfugiô#], m., _a fugitive, deserter, refugee_.

#perfugiô#, see #fugiô#.

#pergô#, see #regô#.

#perîclitor, âri, âtus sum# [#perîculum#], _to try, test_; intrans., _to
be in danger, incur risk_.

#perîculôsus# [#perîculum#], adj., _perilous, dangerous_.

#perîculum, î#, n., _trial_; _danger, peril_.

#perîtus#, adj., _experienced, skilled, expert_. As noun, #perîtus, î#,
m., _an expert_.

#perliciô#, see #*laciô#.

#permittô#, see #mittô#.

#permoveô#, see #moveô#.

#permultus# [#per# + #multus#], adj., _very much, very many_. As noun,
#permultum, î#, n., _a great deal_; #permultî, ôrum#, pl. m., _very
many_ (persons).

#permûtô#, see #mûtô#.

#perniciês, êî#, f., _destruction, ruin, overthrow_.

#perniciôsus# [#perniciês#], adj., _dangerous, destructive_.

#perôrô#, see #ôrô#.

#perpellô#, see #pellô#.

#perpetuô# [abl. of #perpetuus#], adv., _continually, forever_.

#perpetuus#, adj., _continuous, uninterrupted_; #in perpetuum#,
_forever_.

#perrumpô#, see #rumpô#.

#persaepe# [#per# + #saepe#], adv., _very often_.

#perscrîbô#, see #scrîbô#.

#persequor#, see #sequor#.

#perstringô#, see #stringô#.

#persuâdeô#, see #suâdeô#.

#pertaesus# [orig. part. of #pertaedet#, _it wearies, disgusts_], adj.,
_disgusted with, sick of_.

#pertinâciter# [#pertinâx#, _persistent_], adv., _persistently,
stubbornly_.

#pertineô#, see #teneô#.

#pertrahô#, see #trahô#.

#perturbô, âre, âvî, âtus# [#per# + #turbô#, _to disturb_], _to confuse,
disturb, upset_.

#perveniô#, see #veniô#.

#pês, pedis#, m., _the foot_; _a foot_ (in measurements).

#pessimus#, see #malus#.

#pêstifer, fera, ferum# [#pêstis# + #ferô#], adj., _baneful,
destructive_.

#pêstilêns, entis# [#pêstis#], adj., _baneful_.

#pêstilentia, ae# [#pêstilêns#], f., _pest, plague, disease_.

#pêstis, is#, f., _plague, pest_; _curse, bane_.

#petîtiô, ônis# [#petô#], f., _candidacy_.

#petô, ere, îvî (iî), îtus#, _to strive for, seek_; _beg, ask, request_;
_assail, attack_; intrans., _to be a candidate_.

  #ex--expetô, ere, îvî, îtus#, _to seek, desire, crave_.

  #re--repetô, ere, îvî, îtus#, _to seek again, try to get back,
  demand back_.

#phalerae, ârum#, pl. f., _a metal breastplate_ (esp. for horses),
_trappings_.

#Pharnacês, is#, m., _a son of Mithridates_.

#Pharsâlicus#, adj., _of_ or _at Pharsalus_.

#Pharsâlus, î#, f., a city in Thessaly, near which Caesar defeated
Pompey, 48 B.C.

#Philippî, ôrum#, pl. m., a city in Macedonia, near which Brutus and
Cassius were defeated by Octavianus and Antony, B.C. 42.

#philosophia, ae#, f., _philosophy_.

#philosophus, î#, m., _a philosopher_.

#Philus, î#, m., see #Fûrius#.

#pietâs, âtis# [#pius#, _dutiful_], f., _conscientiousness, dutiful
conduct, devotion, piety_; _filial affection, loyalty_.

#piget, êre, uit# and #itum est#, impers., _it pains, grieves,
disgusts_.

#pîgnus, oris#, n., _pledge, security_; _assurance, proof_.

#pilleus, î#, m., _a_ (close-fitting) _cap_.

#pinguis, e#, adj., _fat, sleek_.

#pîrâta, ae#, m., _a sea-robber, pirate_.

#pîrâticus# [#pîrâta#], adj., _of_ or _with_ (against) _the pirates_.

#piscîna, ae# [#piscis#], f., _a fish-pond_.

#piscis, is#, m., _a fish_.

#Pîsô, ônis#, m., a cognomen in the Calpurnian gens.

  1. _Cn._ (_Calpurnius_) _Pîsô_, mentioned in XIII, 64, as a type of
  excessive rigor and severity.

  2. _L. Calpurnius Pîsô Frûgî_, consul 133 B.C.; opponent of
  C. Gracchus in 121; author of a historical work called _Annâlês_.

#Placentia, ae#, f., a city in Cisalpine Gaul, on the Po.

#placeô, êre, uî, --#, _to please, be agreeable to_; _seem best to_;
impers., #placet, uit# or #placitum est#, with dat., _to be
resolved by_.

  #dis--displiceô, êre, uî, --#, _to displease_.

#placidê# [#placidus#, _calm_], adv., _calmly, quietly_.

#plâcô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to soothe, appease_; _conciliate, reconcile_.

#plâga, ae#, f., _a stroke, blow_.

#Plancus, î#, m., _C. Plôtius Plancus_, proscribed by the Second
Triumvirate.

#plaustrum, î#, n., _a wagon, cart_.

#plausus, ûs# [#plaudô#, _to clap the hands_] m., _applause,
acclamations_.

#plêbêius# [#plêbs#], adj., _plebeian_. As noun, #plêbêî, ôrum#, pl. m.,
_the plebeians_. See #plêbs#.

#plêbs, plêbis#, f., _the common people, rabble_; _the plebeians_, or
the population that grew up round the patricians (see #patricius#) from
such causes as the settlement of foreigners in Rome, or the emancipation
of slaves.

#plectô, ere, --, --#, _to beat, punish_ (usually in pass.).

#plênus# [cf. #*pleô#], adj., _full, full of_.

#*pleô, plêre, plêvî, plêtus#, _to fill_.

  #com--compleô, êre, êvî, êtus#, _to fill_ (to the brim): _complete_.

  #ex--expleô, êre, êvî, êtus#, _to fill up, fill_.

  #in--impleô, êre, êvî, êtus#, _to fill up_.

  #ob--oppleô, êre, êvî, êtus#, _to fill_; _cover_.

  #re--repleô, êre, êvî, êtus#, _to fill again, refill, fill up_.

#plêrîque, aeque, aque#, adj., _very many, most_.

#Plînius, î#, m., _C. Plînius Secundus_, commonly known as _Pliny the
Elder_, A.D. 23-79. He wrote a sort of encyclopaedia called _Historia
Nâtûrâlis_.

#Plôtius, î#, m., see #Plancus#.

#plumbeus# [#plumbum#], adj., _leaden_.

#plumbum, î#, n., _lead_.

#plûrimus#, see #multus#.

#plûs, plûris#, adj., see #multus#.

#poena, ae#, f., _compensation, punishment, penalty_.

#Poenî, ôrum#, pl. m., _the Phoenicians, Carthaginians_ (see
#Carthâgô#).

#poêta, ae#, m., _a poet_.

#Pôlliô, ônis#, m., _Vedius Pôlliô_, punished by Augustus for cruelty to
a slave.

#Pompêiânus#, adj., _Pompey's, Pompeian_.

#Pompêius, î#, m., _Cn. Pompêius_, surnamed _Mâgnus_; born B.C. 106, he
was consul in 70, having fought Sertorius in Spain, 76-71; defeated the
pirates in 67, Mithridates in 66, and formed the First Triumvirate with
Caesar and Crassus in 60. He was defeated by Caesar in 48 at Pharsalus
in Thessaly, and soon after murdered.

#Pompilius, î#, m., #Numa Pompilius#, second king of Rome.

#Pompônius, î#, m., _M. Pompônius_, tribune of the people in 362 B.C.

#Pomptînus#, adj., _Pomptine_; #palûdês Pomptînae#, _the Pomptine
Marshes_ in Latium, southeast of Rome.

#pondus, eris# [#pendô#,], n., _weight_.

#pônô, ere, posuî, positus#, _to put down, place, set, deposit_; _serve_
(at meals); _spend_; _set up, build_; #castra pônere#, _to pitch a
camp_; #rudîmentum pônere#, _to lay aside_ (i.e. get through) _the first
steps, to learn_.

  #ad--appônô, ere, posuî, positus#, _to set before, serve_
  (at table).

  #con--compônô, ere, posuî, positus#, _to arrange, settle_;
  _conclude, finish_.

  #dê--dêpônô, ere, posuî, positus#, _to lay down_ or _aside, put
  down_; _stop_; _arrange, establish_.

  #dis--dispônô, ere, posuî, positus#, _to arrange, array, dispose_.

  #ex--expônô, ere, posuî, positus#, _to set_ or _put forth_; _land,
  disembark_; _expose, abandon_; _relate, explain_.

  #in--impônô, ere, posuî, positus#, _to place_ or _put upon_ or _in_;
  #lêgês impônere#, _to dictate terms_.

  #ob--oppônô, ere, posuî, positus#, _to put in the way, set against,
  oppose_.

  #prae--praepônô, ere, posuî, positus#, _to set over, put in
  charge of_.

  #prô--prôpônô, ere, posuî, positus#, _to put_ or _set forth_;
  _expose to view, submit_; _propose, offer_; _resolve, determine_.

  #re--repônô, ere, posuî, positus#, _to put back, replace, restore_.

#pôns, pontis#, m., _a bridge_.

#ponticulus, î# [dim. of #pôns#], m., _a little bridge_.

#Ponticus#, adj., _pertaining to Pontus, Pontic_.

#Pontus, î#, m., _Pontus_, a country in Asia Minor, south of the Black
Sea.

#populâris, is# [#populus#], m., _a fellow-countryman_.

#populor, ârî, âtus sum#, _to lay waste, ravage, plunder_.

#populus, î#, m., _a people, nation_; collectively, _the people, the
citizens_.

#Porcia, ae#, f., a daughter of Cato Uticensis (see #Catô#), and wife of
M. Brutus.

#porrigô#, see #regô#.

#Porsena, ae#, m., _Porsena_, a king of Clusium in Etruria.

#porta, ae#, f., _a city gate, gate_.

#portendô#, see #tendô#.

#porticus, ûs# [#porta#], f., _a colonnade, arcade, portico_.

#portô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to bear, carry, bring_.

  #re--reportô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to bring back_; _carry off or away_.

#portôrium, î# [#portus#], n., _a tax, duty, tariff_.

#portus, ûs#, m., _a harbor, haven_.

#pôscô, ere, popôscî, --#, _to ask, demand_.

  #dê--dêpôscô, ere, popôscî, --#, _to demand urgently, claim_.

  #ex--expôscô, ere, popôscî, --#, _to demand, claim_.

  #re--repôscô, ere, --, --#, _to demand_ (back), _claim_.

#Posîdônius, î#, m., a Stoic philosopher, contemporary with Cicero and
Pompey.

#possum, posse, potuî, --# [#potis#, _able_ + #sum#], _to be able, can_;
_have influence, be strong_.

#post#, (1) adv., _after, later, afterwards_; (2) prep, with acc.,
_after, behind_.

#posteâ# [#post# + #is#], adv., _afterwards_.

#posterus# [#post#], adj., _following, next_; comp. #posterior, us#,
gen. #ôris#, _later_; sup. #postrêmus#, _last, lowest_; #in posterum#,
_for the future_; #ad postrêmum#, _finally_; #postrêmô#, _at last,
finally_. As noun, #posterî, ôrum#, pl. m., _descendants, posterity_.

#posthabeô#, see #habeô#.

#posthâc# [#post# + #hîc#], adv., _hereafter, thereafter, in the
future_.

#postîcum, î# [#postîcus#, _in the rear_], n., _a back door_.

#postis, is#, m., _a door-post, post_.

#postquam# or #post . . . quam# [#post# + #quam#], conj., _after, when_.

#postrêmô#, see #posterus#.

#postrêmus#, see #posterus#.

#postrîdiê# [#posterus# + #diês#], adv., _on the following day, next
day_.

#pôstulâtum, î# [#pôstulô#], n., _a demand, request_.

#pôstulô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to request, demand_.

#potêns, entis# [orig. part. of #possum#], adj., _able, mighty,
influential_.

#potentâtus, ûs# [#potêns#], m., _power, authority, dominion_.

#potentia, ae# [#potêns#], f., _power, might_.

#potestâs, âtis# [#potis#, _able_], f., _might, power_ (esp. that of a
magistrate); _dominion, rule_; _opportunity_.

#potior, îrî, îtus sum#, _to become master of, obtain, acquire, get_.

#prae#, prep, with abl., _before, in front of_; _in comparison with_; in
composition, _before, very_.

#praeacûtus# [#prae# + #acûtus#, _sharp_], adj., _sharp at the end,
pointed_.

#praebeô#, see #habeô#.

#praecêdô#, see #cêdô#.

#praeceptor, ôris# [#praecipiô#], m., _teacher_.

#praeceptum, î# [#praecipiô#], n., _teaching, maxim, rule_; _command,
order_.

#praecîdô#, see #caedô#.

#praecinô#, see #canô#.

#praecipiô#, see #capiô#.

#praecipuê# [#praecipuus#, _special_], adv., _chiefly, principally,
especially_.

#praeclârê# [#praeclârus#], adv., _gloriously, excellently_.

#praeclârus# [#prae# + #clârus#], adj., _very bright_ or _brilliant,
excellent, distinguished_.

#praecô, ônis#, m., _a crier, herald_.

#praeda, ae#, f., _booty, spoil, plunder_.

#praedicâtiô, ônis# [#praedicô#], f., _a public proclamation,
statement_.

#praedicô#, see #dicô#.

#praedîcô#, see #dîcô#.

#praedô, ônis# [#praeda#], m., _one that makes_ (gains) _booty, robber_.

#praefectus, î# [#praeficiô#, _to place in command_], m., _a leader,
commander_.

#praeferô#, see #ferô#.

#praeferôx, ôcis# [#prae# + #ferôx#], adj., _insolent, full of
confidence_.

#praefor, fârî, fâtus sum# [#prae# + #for#, _to speak_], _to say by way
of preface_.

#praelûceô, êre, lûxî, --# [#prae# + #lûceô#, _to shine_], _to shine
before, light the way before_.

#praemium, î# [#prae# + #emô#], n., _reward, prize_.

#praepônô#, see #pônô#.

#praeripiô#, see #rapiô#.

#praesêns, entis# [orig. part. of #praesum#], adj., _present, at hand_;
_face to face_.

#praesidium, î# [#praesideô#, _to defend_], n., _help, aid, defense_;
_defensive force, garrison_; _fort, post, station_.

#praestô#, see #stô#.

#praesum#, see #sum#.

#praeter#, prep, with acc., _past, beyond_; _contrary to, against_;
_besides, except_; in composition, _past, beyond_.

#praetereâ# [#praeter# + #is#], adv., _in addition to this, besides,
moreover_.

#praetereô#, see (1) #eô#.

#praeteritus# [orig. part. of #praetereô#], adj., _past_.

#praetextus# [orig. part. of #praetexô#, _to edge, border_], adj.,
_bordered, edged_. As noun, #praetexta, ae# (sc. #toga#), f., _the toga
praetexta_, or white toga with purple border, worn by magistrates and by
free-born children till the sixteenth or seventeenth year, when they
became of age and assumed the _toga virîlis_, which was wholly white.

#praetor, ôris# [orig. #praeitor#, from #prae# + (1) #eô#], m., _a
leader, commander_; among the Romans, _a praetor_ or magistrate, whose
especial business was the administration of justice. After Sulla's time
eight or more were elected annually. The praetors often served in
command of armies, esp. in the provinces, and after acting as judges in
Rome, were regularly assigned to duty in the provinces with the title of
_prôpraetor_.

#praetôrius# [#praetor#], adj., _of_ or _belonging to the general, the
general's_; _praetorian_. As noun, #praetôrius, î#, m., _a man of
praetorian rank, an ex-praetor_.

#praeveniô#, see #veniô#.

#prandium, î#, n., _lunch_.

#prâtum, î#, n., _a field, meadow_.

#prâvus#, adj., _crooked, wrong_; _perverse, wicked_.

#precor, ârî, âtus sum# [#prex#], _to ask, beg, beseech_.

  #dê--dêprecor, ârî, âtus sum#, _to plead against, plead, avert by
  prayer_; _decline_.

#prehendô, ere, î, prehênsus#, _to grasp, seize, catch_.

  #ad--apprehendô, ere, î, hênsus#, _to lay hold of, seize, grasp_.

  #con--comprehendô, ere, î, hênsus#, _to seize, catch, arrest_;
  _understand_.

  #dê--dêprehendô, ere, î, hênsus#, _to seize, catch_; _surprise,
  detect, discover_.

  #re--reprehendô, ere, î, hênsus#, _to hold back, check_; _blame,
  criticise, reprove_.

#premô, ere, pressî, pressus#, _to press_; _press hard, crush_.

#con--comprimô, ere, pressî, pressus#, _to restrain, check, crush_.

#ex--exprimô, ere, pressî, pressus#, _to press_ or _force out_; _utter,
express_.

#ob--opprimô, ere, pressî, pressus#, _to crush utterly, overpower,
overwhelm, master_.

#re--reprimô, ere, pressî, pressus#, _to press_ or _keep back, check,
restrain_.

#pretiôsus# [#pretium#], adj., _of great value, costly, precious_.

#pretium, î#, n., _money value, price_; _money_; _recompense, reward_;
#operae pretium est#, _it is worth while_.

#prex, precis#, f., _a prayer, entreaty_ (chiefly in pl.).

#prîdem#, adv., _long since, long ago_.

#prîdiê# [#pri(or)# + #diê#], adv., _the day before_.

#prîmô#, see #prior#.

#prîmôrês, um# [#prîmus#], pl. m., _first men, chiefs, nobles_.

#prîmum#, see #prior#.

#prîmus#, see #prior#.

#prînceps, ipis# [#prîmus# + #capiô#], adj., _first, foremost_. As noun,
m., _leading man, chief, leader_.

#prîncipium, î# [#prînceps#], n., _beginning_.

#prior, us#, gen. #priôris#, comp. adj., _foremost, first, prior_; sup.
#prîmus#, _first, foremost_; #prîmô, prîmum#, _at first, first_.

#Prîscus, î#, m., cognomen of _Tarquinius Prîscus_, the fifth king of
Rome.

#prius# [neuter of #prior#], adv., _before, sooner, previously, first of
all_.

#priusquam# or #prius . . . quam# [#prius# + #quam#], conj., _earlier
than, before_.

#prîvâtim# [#prîvâtus#], adv., _individually_; _by one's self,
privately_.

#prîvâtus# [#prîvô#], adj., _personal, private, individual_. As noun,
#prîvâtus, î#, m., _a man in private life, a private citizen_.

#prîvô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to bereave, deprive, rob_.

#prô#, prep. with abl., _in front of, before_; _in behalf of, for_;
_instead of_; _in comparison with, in accordance with_; in composition,
_forth, for_.

#prô#, interj., _O! ah! alas! Heavens!_

#proavus, î# [#prô# + #avus#], m., _great-grandfather_.

#probô, âre, âvî, âtus# [#probus#, _good_], _to test_ (and find good),
_approve, commend_; _show, prove_.

  #ad--approbô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to approve fully, favor_; _show,
  demonstrate_.

  #con--comprobô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to approve, sanction_; _confirm_.

#Proca, ae#, m., a king of Alba Longa, father of Numitor and Amulius.

#prôcêdô#, see #cêdô#.

#procella, ae#, f., _a strong wind_; _storm_.

#prôcêritâs, âtis# [#prôcêrus#, _tall_], f., _height, tallness_.

#prôclâmô#, see #clâmô#.

#prôcônsul, is# [#prô#, _in place of_ + #cônsul#], m., _a proconsul,
governor of a province_. See #cônsul# (end).

#procul#, adv., _in the distance, afar_; with abl., _far from_.

#Proculus, î#, m., a Roman senator who claimed that Romulus appeared to
him after his death.

#prôcumbô#, see #*cumbô#.

#prôcûrô#, see #cûrô#.

#prôdigium, î#, n., _an omen, portent_; _strange being, prodigy,
monster_.

#prôditiô, ônis# [#prôdô#], f., _treason_.

#prôditor, ôris# [#prôdô#], m., _a traitor_.

#prôdô#, see #dô#.

#proelior, ârî, âtus sum# [#proelium#], _to fight, wage war_.

#proelium, î#, n., _a battle, combat_.

#profectô# [#prô# + #factum#], adv., _indeed, in truth, certainly, to be
sure_.

#prôferô#, see #ferô#.

#proficîscor, î, profectus sum#, _to set out, proceed_; _depart_.

#profiteor#, see #fateor#.

#prôflîgô#, see #*flîgô#.

#profugiô#, see #fugiô#.

#profugus, î# [#profugiô#], m., _a fugitive, exile_.

#profundô#, see #fundô#.

#profûsus# [orig. part. of #profundô#], adj., _lavish, extravagant,
profuse_.

#prôgredior#, see #gradior#.

#prohibeô#, see #habeô#.

#prôiciô#, see #iaciô#.

#proinde# [#prô# + #inde#], adv., _hence, therefore_.

#prôlâbor#, see #lâbor#.

#prômineô, êre, uî, --#, _to project, extend, lean out_.

#prômissus# [orig. part. of #prômittô#], adj., _hanging down, long,
flowing_.

#prômissum, î# [#prômittô#], n., _a promise_.

#prômittô#, see #mittô#.

#prômoveô#, see #moveô#.

#prômptê# [#prômptus#], adv., _quickly, readily_.

#prômptus# [#prômô#, _to put forth_], adj., _visible, at hand_; _ready,
alert, prompt_.

#pronepôs, ôtis# [#prô# + #nepôs#], m., _great-grandson_.

#prônûntiô#, see #nûntiô#.

#propâgô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to propagate, increase, prolong_.

#prope#, adv., _near by_; _nearly, almost_ (esp. with numbers): comp.
#propius#; sup. #proximê#, _nearest, next_.

#prôpellô#, see #pellô#.

#properô, âre, âvî, âtum# [#properus#, _quick_], _to speed, hasten_.

#propinquus# [#prope#], adj., _neighboring, near_; as noun, _a
relative_.

#propior# [#prope#], comp. adj., _nearer_; sup. #proximus#, _nearest,
next_; _latest, last_; _next, following_; #in proximô#, _near by_. As
noun, #proximî, ôrum#, pl. m., _bystanders_.

#prôpônô#, see #pônô#.

#prôpositum, î# [#prôpônô#], n., _plan, purpose_.

#propriê# [#proprius#], adv., _peculiarly, especially_.

#proprius#, adj., _own, one's own_; with gen. or dat., _peculiar to,
characteristic of_.

#propter#, prep. with acc., _on account of_.

#prôripiô#, see #rapiô#.

#prôrogô#, see #rogô#.

#prôscrîbô#, see #scrîbô#.

#prôscrîptiô, ônis# [#prôscrîbô#], f., _a notice of sale_;
_proscription, confiscation_.

#prôsequor#, see #sequor#.

#prôsiliô#, see #saliô#.

#prôspectus, ûs# [#prôspiciô#, _to look forward_], m., _view, prospect_.

#prôsperê# [#prôsperus#], adv., _propitiously, successfully_.

#prôsperus# [#prô# + #spês#], adj., _according to one's hopes,
favorable_.

#prôsternô#, see #sternô#.

#prôsum#, see #sum#.

#prôtendô#, see #tendô#.

#prôtinus#, adv., _right on, continuously_; _at once, immediately_.

#prôvehô#, see #vehô#.

#prôvincia, ae#, f., _a province_ (i.e. a territory outside of Italy
under Roman government); _sphere of operations_.

#prôvocô#, see #vocô#.

#proximê#, see #prope#.

#proximus#, see #propior#.

#prûdêns, entis# [orig. #prôvidêns#, part. of #prôvideô#, _to see
ahead_], adj., _fore-seeing, skillful, clever, prudent_.

#prûdentia, ae# [#prûdêns#], f., _foresight, practical wisdom, good
sense_.

#psittacus, î#, m., _a parrot_.

#Ptolemaeus, î#, m., a name borne by the kings of Egypt after the time
of Alexander the Great.

#pûblicê# [#pûblicus#], adv., _in the name of_ (by order of) _the state,
publicly, officially_.

#pûblicô, âre, âvî, âtus# [#pûblicus#], _to open to the public, make
public_.

#pûblicus# [orig. #populicus#: cf. #populus#], adj., _belonging to the
people_ (state), _public_; _official_. As noun, #pûblicum, î#, n., _the
state treasury_.

#Pûblius, î#, m., a Roman praenomen.

#pudor, ôris#, m., _modesty, shame, hesitancy_.

#puella, ae# [dim. of #puer#], f., _a girl_.

#puer, puerî#, m., _a child_; _boy_; _slave_.

#puerîlis, e# [#puer#], adj., _boyish, youthful_.

#pueritia, ae# [#puer#], f., _childhood_; _boyhood, youth_ (extending
usually to the 17th year).

#pugiô, ônis#, m., _a dagger, dirk_.

#pûgna, ae#, f., _a combat, fight, battle_.

#pûgnâx, âcis# [#pûgna#], adj., _fond of fighting, combative_.

#pûgnô, âre, âvî, âtum#, _to fight_; _oppose, resist_.

  #ex--expûgnô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to take by storm, capture_;
  _overpower, prevail upon_.

  #in--impûgnô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to fight against, oppose, attack_.

  #ob--oppûgnô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to fight against, assault, besiege_.

  #re--repûgnô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to fight back, oppose, resist_.

#pulcher, chra, chrum#, adj., _beautiful_; _excellent, illustrious_.

#Pulcher, chrî#, m., _P. Claudius_, a son of A. Claudius Caecus, consul
249 B.C.

#pullârius, î# [#pullus#], m., _keeper of the sacred chickens_.

#pullus, î#, m., _a young animal_; _chicken_.

#pulvis, eris#, m., _dust_.

#pungô, ere, pupugî, punctus#, _to strike, prick, puncture_; _sting,
torment_.

#Pûnicus#, adj., _Phoenician, Punic_; _Carthaginian_ (see #Carthâgô#).

#pûniô, îre, îvî, îtus# [#poena#], _to punish_.

#pûrgô, âre, âvî, âtus# [#pûrus#, _clean_ + #agô#], _to make clean_;
_clear away, excuse_.

#putô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to cleanse_ (vines by cutting); _consider,
think, suppose_.

  #am--amputô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to cut all round, cut away, lop off_.

  #con--computô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to sum up, reckon, compute_.

  #dis--disputô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to weigh, examine_; _discuss_;
  _argue_.

  #re--reputô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to think over, reflect on, reflect_.

#Py:rênaeus, î# (sc. #môns#), m., _the Pyrenees_.

#Pyrrhus, î#, m., a king of Epirus, who allied himself with Tarentum,
and invaded Italy, 280-275 B.C.


#Q#

#Q.#, abbreviation of the name #Quîntus#.

#quadrâgêsimus# [#quadrâgintâ#], num. adj., _fortieth_.

#quadrâgintâ#, indecl. num. adj., _forty_.

#quadrîgae, ârum#, pl. f., a _four-horse team_.

#quadringentî, ae, a# [#quattuor# + #centum#], num. adj., _four
hundred_.

#quaerô, ere, quaesîvî, quaesîtus#, _to seek_; _ask_; _get, gain_.

  #ad--adquîrô, ere, quîsîvî, quîsîtus#, _to acquire, get, gain_.

  #con--conquîrô, ere, quîsîvî, quîsîtus#, _to seek_ or _search fo_;
  _hunt up_.

  #re--requîrô, ere, quîsîvî (iî), quîsîtus#, _to seek_ or _search
  for_.

#quaesô, ere, îvî, --#, _to seek_; _beg, pray_.

#quaestor, ôris# [orig. #quaesîtor#; cf. #quaerô, quaesô#], m.,
_quaestor, quartermaster_, a name given to certain magistrates who had
the care of public monies and military supplies, both at Rome and in the
provinces.

#quaestûra, ae# [#quaestor#], f., _the quaestorship_.

#quâlis, e#, adj., (1) interrog., _of what kind? what sort of?_
(2) rel., _of such a kind, such as, as_.

#quâliscumque, quâlecumque#, adj., _of whatsoever kind, of any kind_.

#quam# [(1) #quis#], adv., _how, how much_; after a comp., _than_; with
a sup., _as possible_; #quam prîmum#, _as soon as possible_; #quamdiû#,
_as long as_; #tam . . . quam#, _as . . . so, not only . . . but also_.

#quamquam#, conj., _although, even if_.

#quamvîs# [#quam# + #vîs#, from #volô#], adv. and conj., _howevermuch,
although_.

#quandôquidem# [#quandô#, _since_ + #quidem#], conj., _since indeed_.

#quantus# [#quam#], adj., (1) interr., _how great? how much?_ (2) rel.,
correl. to #tantus#, _as great as, as_.

#quantum#, adv., _how much? how far?_

#quâpropter# [(1) #quis# + #propter#], adv.; (1) interr., _why?
wherefore?_ (2) rel., _for which reason, wherefore_.

#quâre# [#quâ# + #rê#], adv., (1) interr., _why?_ (2) rel., _for which
reason, wherefore, therefore_.

#quârtâna, ae# [#quârtus#], f. (sc. #febris#, _fever_), a fever or ague
recurring every fourth day.

#quârtus# [#quattuor#], num. adj., _fourth_.

#quasî#, adv. and conj., _as if, just as if, as though, ostensibly_; _on
the ground that_.

#quater#, adv., _four times_.

#quatiô, ere, --, quassus#, _to shake, strike_.

  #dê--dêcutiô, ere, cussî, cussus#, _to shake off_ or _down, strike
  off_.

  #ex--excutiô, ere, cussî, cussus#, _to shake off, fling off_.

  #per--percutiô, ere, cussî, cussus#, _to strike through, pierce_;
  _smite, strike_; _kill, slay_; _overwhelm, shock_.

#quattuor#, indecl. num. adj., _four_.

#que#, conj., enclitic, _and, and yet, but_.

#queror, î, questus sum#, _to complain_.

  #con--conqueror, î, questus sum#, _to complain bitterly, lament,
  deplore_.

#questus, ûs# [#queror#], m., _complaint, lament_.

(1) #quî, quae, quod#, interr. pron., used adjectively, _which? what?
what kind of?_ See (1) #quis#.

(2) #quî, quae, quod#, rel. pron., _who, which, what, that_; _whoever,
whatever_.

(3) #quî, quae#, or #qua, quod#, indef. pron., used adjectively, _any,
some_.

(4) #quî# [old abl. of (1) #quî#], adv., _how?_

#quia#, conj., _because, since_.

#quîcumque, quaecumque, quodcumque#, indef. rel. pron., _whoever,
whichever, whatever_.

#quîdam, quaedam, quiddam#, and as adj., #quoddam#, indef. pron., _a
certain one, somebody_; _a certain_.

#quidem#, adv., _indeed, in fact, to be sure_; #nê . . . quidem#, _not
even, not at all_.

#quiês, êtis#, f., _rest, sleep, quiet, respite_.

#quiêtus# [orig. part, of #quiêscô#, _to be at rest_], _quiet,
peaceful_.

#quîn# [(4) #quî# + #nê#], conj., _how not? why not_; _that, that not,
but that_; #quîn et# or #etiam#, _nay more_.

#Quîntilius, î#, m., gentile name of _P. Quîntilius Vârus_, an officer
of Augustus, who sustained a severe defeat at the hands of the Germans,
B.C. 9.

#Quîntîlis, is# [#Quîntus#], m. (sc. #mênsis#), _July_, the fifth month
(counting from March. See #December#).

#quîndecemvir, î# [#quîndecem#, _fifteen_ + #vir#], m., _a member of a
board of fifteen men_.

#quîngentî, ae, a# [#quînque# + #centum#], num. adj., _five hundred_.

#quînquâgintâ#, indecl. num. adj., _fifty_.

#quînque#, indecl. num. adj., _five_.

#quînquennium, î# [#quînque# + #annus#], n., _a period of five years_.

#quînquiês# [#quînque#], adv., _five times_.

#quîntus# [#quînque#], num. adj., _fifth_.

#Quîntus, î#, m., a praenomen.

#quîppe#, adv., _indeed, as you see, surely_.

#Quirînâlis, is# (sc. #collis#), m., _the Quirinal_, one of the hills of
Rome.

#Quirînus, î#, m., a name given to Romulus after his death and
deification.

#Quirîtês, ium# [#Curês#], pl. m., orig. _the people of Cures_; later,
the name used to denote the Romans in their civil capacity, hence:
_citizens, Romans_. See #Rômânî#.

(1) #quis, quid#, interr. pron. used substantively, _who? which? what?_
See (1) #quî#.

(2) #quis, qua, quid#, indef. pron. used substantively, _some one, any
one_; _something, anything_. See (3) #quî#.

#quisnam, quaenam, quidnam# [(1) #quis# + #nam#], interr. pron., _who_
or _what in the world? who? which? what?_

#quispiam, quaepiam, quodpiam# and #quidpiam#, indef. pron., _some, any,
some one_.

#quisquam, quaequam, quicquam#, indef. pron., adj. or noun, _any one,
anything, any_.

#quisque, quaeque, quidque# or #quodque#, indef. pron., noun or adj.,
_each, every, each one, every one_.

#quisquis, quicquid#, indef. pron., _whoever, whatever, every one who,
everything which_.

#quô# [#quî#], adv. and conj. As adv., (1) interr., _whither_? (2) rel.,
_whither_; as conj., _in order that, that, that thereby_.

#quôcumque#, adv., _whithersoever_.

#quod#, conj., _because, that, in that_; _as to the fact that, so far
as_; #quod sî#, _but if_.

#quômodo# [(1) #quî# + #modus#], adv., (1) interr., _how?_ (2) rel., _in
the manner that, as_.

#quondam#, adv., _once, formerly_.

#quoniam# [#quom# (= #cum#, _since_) + #iam#], conj., _since, because,
seeing that_.

#quoque#, conj., _also, too_ (placed after the word it emphasizes).

#quôrsum# or #quôrsus# [orig. #quôversus#; #quô# + #vertô#], adv.,
_whither?_

#quotannîs# [#quot# + #annus#], adv., _each year, yearly_.

#quoûsque# [#quô# + #ûsque#, _until_], adv., (1) interr., _until what
time?_ (2) rel., _until_.


#R#

#radius, î#, m., _a staff, rod_; _beam, ray_.

#radîx, îcis#, f., _a root_; _foot, base_.

#rapîna, ae# [#rapiô#], f., _robbery, pillage_.

#rapiô, ere, rapuî, raptus#, _to seize_ and _carry off, drag off_;
_plunder, destroy_; _hasten, hurry_.

  #ab--abripiô, ere, uî, reptus#, _to take away forcibly, drag off_.

  #ad--adripiô, ere, uî, reptus#, _to snatch quickly, seize_.

  #con--corripiô, ere, uî, reptus#, _to seize, catch up_; #morbô
  corripî#, _to fall sick_.

  #dis--dîripiô, ere, uî, reptus#, _to tear apart_; _ravage, plunder_.

  #prae--praeripiô, ere, uî, reptus#, _to snatch away, carry off_ or
  _away_.

  #prô--prôripiô, ere, uî, reptus#, _to fling forth_; with #sê#,
  _rush_.

#rârô# [#rârus#], adv., _seldom, rarely_.

#rârus#, adj., _thin_; _scattered, rare_.

#ratiô, ônis# [#reor#], f., _reckoning, calculation, account_; _method,
plan_.

#ratis, is#, f., _a raft, boat, vessel_.

#re# or #red#, insep. prefix, _again, back_.

#rebellô#, see #bellô#.

#recêdô#, see #cêdô#.

#receptus, ûs# [#recipiô#], m., _a retreat_.

#recessus, ûs# [#recêdô#], m., _nook, corner_.

#recidô#, see #cadô#.

#reciperô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to regain, recover_.

#recipiô#, see #capiô#.

#reconciliô#, see #conciliô#.

#recreô#, see #creô#.

#rêctê# [#rêctus# (part. of #regô#), _straight, right_], adv., _rightly,
duly, well_.

#recubô#, see #cubô#.

#recûsô, âre, âvî, âtus# [#re# + #causa#], _to decline, refuse_.

#reddô#, see #dô#.

#redeô#, see (1) #eô#.

#redigô#, see #agô#.

#redimô#, see #emô#.

#redintegrô, âre, âvî, âtus# [#red# + #integer#], _to make whole again,
renew_.

#reditus, ûs# [#redeô#], m., _a going_ (or coming) _back, return_.

#redûcô#, see #dûcô#.

#refellô, ere, î, --# [#re# + #fallô#, _to deceive_], _to prove false,
refute, disprove_.

#referô#, see #ferô#.

#refoveô#, see #foveô#.

#refringô#, see #frangô#.

#refugiô#, see #fugiô#.

#rêgâlis, e# [#rêx#], adj., _kinglike, royal_.

#rêgia, ae# [#rêgius#], f. (sc. #domus#), _a palace_.

#rêgîna, ae# [#rêx#], f., _a queen_.

#regiô, ônis# [#regô#], f., _district, region_.

#rêgius# [#rêx#], adj., _kingly, royal, king's_.

#rêgnô, âre, âvî, âtus# [#rêgnum#], _to be king_; _rule, govern_.

#rêgnum, î# [#rêx#], n., _kingly government, sovereignty, sway_; _a
kingdom_.

#regô, ere, rêxî, rêctus#, _to keep straight, guide, conduct, rule_.

  #con--corrigô, ere, rêxî, rêctus#, _to straighten, correct,
  improve_.

  #dis--dîrigô, ere, rêxî, rêctus#, _to guide, steer, direct_.

  #ex--êrigô, ere, rêxî, rêctus#, _to raise_ or _lift up_; _stir up,
  arouse_.

  #per--pergô, ere, perrêxî, perrêctus#, _to go straight on, proceed,
  hasten_; with acc., _pursue with vigor, perform_; #partês pergere#,
  _to play the rôle_.

  #por# (= #prô#)#--porrigô, ere, porrêxî, porrêctus#, _to spread_ or
  _stretch out_; _hold forth, offer, present_.

#regredior#, see #gradior#.

#Rêgulus, î#, m., _M. Atîlius_, consul in 256 B.C.; defeated in Africa
and taken prisoner by the Carthaginians, 255.

#rêiciô#, see #iaciô#.

#relâbor#, see #lâbor#.

#relêgô, âre, âvî, âtus# [#re# + #lêgô#, _to send_], _to send out of the
way, remove_.

#religiô, ônis#, f., _sense of duty_; _religion, devotion to the gods_;
_scruple_.

#religiôsus# [#religiô#], adj., _careful, scrupulous_; _sacred, holy_.

#religô#, see #ligô#.

#relinquô, ere, lîquî, lîctus# [#re# + #linquô#, _to leave_], _to leave
behind, leave_; _bequeath_; _appoint by will_.

#reliquiae, ârum# [#relinquô#], pl. f., _remainder, remnant, residue_.

#reliquus# [cf. #relinquô#], adj., _remaining, rest_.

#remaneô#, see #maneô#.

#remedium, î# [#re# + #medeor#, _to cure_], n., _a cure, remedy_.

#remigrô#, see #migrô#.

#remittô#, see #mittô#.

#remûneror, ârî, âtus sum# [#re# + #mûnerô#, _to reward_], _to reward,
repay_.

#Remus, î#, m., the brother of Romulus.

#renovô, âre, âvî, âtus# [#re# + #novus#], _to renew, restore, revive_.

#renûntiô#, see #nûntiô#.

#renuô#, see #*nuô#.

#reor, rêrî, ratus sum#, _to reckon_; _think, suppose_; #ratus#,
_thinking_.

#repellô#, see #pellô#.

#rependô#, see #pendô#.

#repente# [#repêns#, _sudden_], adv., _suddenly, unexpectedly_.

#repentînus# [#repêns#, _sudden_], adj., _sudden, unexpected_.

#reperiô#, see #pariô#.

#repetô#, see #petô#.

#repleô#, see #*pleô#.

#repônô#, see #pônô#.

#reportô#, see #portô#.

#repôscô#, see #pôscô#.

#reprehendô#, see #prehendô#.

#reprimô#, see #premô#.

#reprômittô#, see #mittô#.

#repudiô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to cast off, divorce_; _reject, scorn_.

#repûgnô#, see #pûgnô#.

#repulsa, ae# [#repellô#], f., _rejection, repulse_; _a defeat at the
polls_.

#reputô#, see #putô#.

#requîrô#, see #quaerô#.

#rês, reî#, f., _thing, matter_; _affair, deed, exploit, event_;
_circumstance_; _a story_; _property, fortune_; _trouble_; #rês
familiâris#, _private property_; #rês pûblica#, _the commonwealth,
state_; #rês gestae#, _exploits_; #rês repetundae#, _extortion_; #rê
vêrâ#, _in reality, in truth_.

#resecô#, see #secô#.

#reserô, âre, âvî, âtus# [#re# + #sêrô#, _to bolt_], _to unlock, open_.

#resîdô#, see #sîdô#.

#resistô#, see #sistô#.

#resolvô#, see #solvô#.

#respergô, ere, spersî, spersus# [#re# + #spargô#, _to strew,
sprinkle_], _to besprinkle, bespatter_.

#respiciô#, see #*speciô#.

#respîrô#, see #spîrô#.

#respondeô#, see #spondeô#.

#respônsum, î# [#respondeô#], n., _answer, reply_, esp. of an oracle;
_warning_.

#rês pûblica#, see #rês#.

#restinguô#, see #stinguô#.

#restituô#, see #statuô#.

#retineô#, see #teneô#.

#retrahô#, see #trahô#.

#reus, î#, m., _defendant, accused person, prisoner_.

#revertor#, see #vertô#.

#revîvîscô, ere, --, --# [#re# + #vîvêscô#, inceptive of #vîvô#], _to
come to life again_.

#revocô#, see #vocô#,

#rêx, rêgis# [cf. #regô#], m., _king, monarch_.

#Rhêa, ae#, f., _Rhêa_, also called _Rhêa Silvia_, mother of Romulus and
Remus.

#Rhênus, î#, m., the river Rhine.

#rhêtor, oris#, m., _a teacher of oratory, rhetorician_; _orator_.

#Rhodus, î#, f., _Rhodes_, a large island off the coast of Asia Minor,
famous for its schools of rhetoric (see #Apollônius#), its colossal
statue of Apollo, and for the skill of its people in navigation.

#rîdeô, êre, rîsî, rîsus#, _to smile, laugh_; _laugh at, mock_.

  #dê--dêrîdeô, êre, rîsî, rîsus#, _to laugh at, mock, deride_.

  #in--inrîdeô, êre, rîsî, rîsus#, _to jeer at, mock, ridicule_.

#rigô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to wet, moisten_.

#rigor, ôris#, m., _severity, rigor_.

#rîpa, ae#, f., _a bank_ (of a river).

#rîsus, ûs# [#rîdeô#], m., _laughter_.

#rîtê# [cf. #rîtus#], adv., _with due ceremonies, duly, fitly,
properly_.

#rîtus, ûs#, m., _religious ceremony, rite_.

#rixa, ae#, f., _a quarrel_ (of blows), _brawl_.

#rôbur, oris#, n., _hard wood, oak_; _strength, vigor, power_.

#rogô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to ask, inquire_; _request, implore_.

  #ab--abrogô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to repeal, annul_.

  #inter--interrogô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to ask, question_.

  #prô--prôrogô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to prolong, extend_.

#Rôma, ae#, f., _Rome_.

#Rômânus#, adj., _Roman_; as noun, #Rômânus, î#, m., _a Roman_; #Rômânî,
ôrum#, pl. m., _the Romans_, the name given to the Romans in their
military capacity.

#Rômulus, î#, m., _Romulus_, founder and first king of Rome, son of Rhea
and Mars.

#Rôscius, î#, m., _Sextus Rôscius_, defended by Cicero on a capital
charge.

#rôstrum, î# [#rôdô#, _to gnaw_], n., _the beak_ or _ram of a ship_;
pl., _the Rostra_, or speaker's platform in the Forum (adorned with
beaks of captured ships).

#Rubicô, ônis#, m., _the Rubicon_, a river in the northeastern part of
Italy.

#rudîmentum, î# [#rudis#], n., _first attempt, beginning_. See #pônô#.

#rudis, e#, adj., _uncouth, unpolished_; _ignorant, rude_.

#ruîna, ae# [#ruô#], f., _downfall, ruin, destruction_; pl., _a fallen
building, ruins_.

#rûmor, ôris#, m., _a story, report, rumor_.

#rumpô, ere, rûpî, ruptus#, _to break, destroy_.

  #con--corrumpô, ere, rûpî, ruptus#, _to destroy_; _seduce, bribe,
  corrupt_.

  #ex--êrumpô, ere, rûpî, ruptum#, _to break forth_ or _out, burst
  forth_.

  #per--perrumpô, ere, rûpî, ruptus#, _to break through, force a way
  through, get across_.

#ruô, ere, î, tus#, _to fall_; _rush, hasten_; with acc., _to cause to
fall, overthrow_.

  #con--corruô, ere, î, --#, _to fall_ (in battle).

  #dis--dîruô, ere, î, tus#, _to tear apart, overthrow, destroy_.

  #ex--êruô, ere, î, tus#, _to cast out_; _dig up, destroy utterly_.

  #in--inruô, êre, î, --#, _to rush in, make an attack_.

  #ob--obruô, ere, î, tus#, _to overwhelm, hide, bury_.

#rûpês, is# [#rumpô#], f., _a rock, cliff_.

#rûrsus# or #rûrsum# [orig. #revorsus#; cf. #revertô#], adv., _back_;
_again_.

#rûs, rûris#, n., _the country_; pl., _the fields_; #rûrî#, _in the
country_.

#rûsticor, âri, âtus sum# [#rûs#], _to live in the country_; _take a
vacation_.

#rûsticus# [#rûs#], adj., _rural, rustic_.


#S#

#Sabînî, ôrum#, pl. m., _the Sabines_, a race in central Italy,
adjoining Latium on the north.

#sacer, cra, crum#, adj., _holy, sacred_; as noun, #sacrum, î#, n., _a
holy thing, sacred vessel_; pl., _religious rites, sacrifices_.

#sacerdôs, ôtis# [#sacer#], m. and f., _priest, priestess_.

#sacrârium, î# [#sacer#], n., _sanctuary, shrine_.

#sacrificium, î# [#sacer# + #faciô#], n., _a sacrifice_.

#sacrô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to set apart_; _bless_; _curse_.

  #con--cônsecrô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to dedicate, consecrate, devote_.

  #ex--exsecror, ârî, âtus sum#, _to curse, abhor_.

#saeculum, î#, n., _a race_; _generation, age, time_.

#saepe#, adv., _frequently, often_.

#saeviô, îre, îvî (iî), îtum# [#saevus#], _to be fierce_ or _cruel,
rage_; #saevîre in aliquem#, _to treat any one cruelly_.

#saevitia, ae# [#saevus#], f., _fury, cruelty_.

#saevus#, adj., _raging, fierce, cruel_.

#sagînô, âre, âvî, âtus# [#sagîna#, _stuffing_], _to fatten_.

#sagulum, î#, n., _a short military cloak_.

#Saguntus, î#, f., and #Saguntum, î#, n., _Saguntum_, a town on the east
coast of Spain.

#Salernitânus#, adj., _of_ or _near Salernum_ (modern Salerno), a town
in Campania.

#Saliî, ôrum# [#saliô#], pl. m., _the Salii_ or _Leapers_, the dancing
priests of Mars.

#Salînâtor, ôris#, m., see #Lîvius#.

#saliô, îre, uî, tus#, _to leap_.

  #dê--dêsiliô, îre, uî, sultum#, _to leap down_.

  #in--însiliô, îre, uî, --#, _to leap up_ or _on, mount_.

  #prô--prôsiliô, îre, uî, --#, _to leap_ or _spring forward_.

  #trâns--trânsiliô, îre, uî, --#, _to leap across, jump over_.

#saltem#, adv., _at least, at all events_.

#saltô, âre, âvî, âtus# [freq. of #saliô#], _to dance, leap_.

  #ex--exsultô, âre, âvî, --#, _to leap, dance_ (esp. with joy),
  _exult, rejoice_.

#saltus, ûs# [#saliô#], m., _a leap, bound_; _leaping, jumping_.

#saltus, ûs#, m., _a forest pasture, mountain glen, ravine, pass_.

#salûbris, e# [#salûs#], adj., _health-giving, wholesome, healthy_;
_beneficial_.

#salûs, ûtis#, f., _health, vigor_; _safety_.

#salûtâtiô, ônis# [#salûtô#], f., _greeting, salutation_.

#salûtâtor, ôris# [#salûtô#], m., _saluter, visitor_.

#salûtô, âre, âvî, âtus# [#salûs#], _to wish one health, greet, salute,
visit_.

  #con--cônsalûtô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to greet_ or _salute warmly_.

#salveô, êre, --, --# [#salvus#], _to be well_; imperative, #salvê,
salvête#, _hail! greetings!_

#salvus#, adj., _well, sound, safe_.

#sambûceus# [#sambûcus#, _an elder-tree_], adj., _of elder, elder_.

#Samnîtês, ium#, pl. m., _the Samnites_, a branch of the Sabine race
inhabiting the mountains southeast of Latium.

#sânê# [#sânus#, _sound_], adv., _indeed, truly, by all means_;
_certainly_.

#sanguinolentus# [#sanguis#], adj., _bloody_.

#sanguis, inis#, m., _blood_.

#sapiô, ere, îvî, --#, _to taste_; _to have taste_ or _understanding_;
_be wise_.

  #dê--dêsipiô, ere, --, --#, _to be foolish_ or _crazy_.

#sapiêns, entis# [orig. part. of #sapiô#], adj., _wise, sensible,
discreet_.

#sapientia, ae# [#sapiêns#], f., _wisdom_.

#Sardinia, ae#, f., an island between Italy and Spain.

#sarmentum, î# [#sarpô#, _to prune_], n., _a twig_; pl., _brushwood,
fagots_.

#satis#, adv., _enough_; _tolerably, quite_; as noun, n., _enough,
sufficiency_.

#satisfaciô, ere, fêcî, factum# [#satis# + #faciô#], _to satisfy, make
reparation_.

#saucius#, adj., _wounded, hurt_.

#saxum, î#, n., _a stone, rock, boulder_.

#scamnum, î#, n., _a bench, stool_.

#scandô, ere, --, --#, _to climb, mount_.

  #ad--âscendô, ere, î, scênsus#, _to climb up, mount, ascend_.

  #con--cônscendô, ere, î, scênsus#, _to mount, ascend_; _go on
  board_.

  #dê--dêscendô, ere, î, scênsum#, _to climb_ or _come down, descend_;
  _dismount_.

  #ex--êscendô, ere, î, scênsus#, _to mount, ascend_.

  #trâns--trânscendô, ere, î, scênsus#, _to climb_ or _pass over,
  cross_.

#scapha, ae#, f., _a light boat, skiff_.

#scelerâtus# [#scelus#], adj., _wicked, impious, accursed_.

#scelestê# [#scelestus#, _impious_], adv., _wickedly, impiously_.

#scelus, eris#, n., _wicked deed, sin, crime_.

#schola, ae#, f., _leisure, leisure for learning_; _place of learning,
school_.

#scîlicet# [#scîre# + #licet#], adv., _plainly, of course, doubtless_.

#scindô, ere, scidî, scissus#, _to cut, tear, rend, split_.

  #ab--abscindô, ere, scidî, scissus#, _to cut_ or _tear off, hew
  off_.

#sciô, îre, scîvî, scîtus#, _to know, understand_; with infin., _to know
how_.

#Scîpiô, ônis#, m., the name of one of the most illustrious families of
Rome, belonging to the Cornelian gens.

  1. _P. Cornêlius Scîpiô_, consul 218 B.C.; defeated by Hannibal at
  the Ticinus and the Trebia; killed, with his brother Cn., in Spain,
  in 212.

  2. _P. Cornêlius Scîpiô Âfricânus Mâior_, son of (1), born B.C. 237;
  commanded in Spain 210-206; consul in 205; defeated Hannibal at Zama
  in 202. He died about 183 B.C.

  3. _L. Cornêlius Scîpiô_, brother of (2), consul in B.C. 190. After
  defeating Antiochus at Magnesia, he received the cognomen
  _Asiâticus_.

  4. _P. Cornêlius Scîpiô Âfricânus Minor_, captured Carthage, B.C.
  146; took Numantia, in Spain, 133; died in 129.

  5. _P. Cornêlius Scîpiô Nâsîca Serâpiô_, see #Nâsîca#.

  6. _Q. Metellus Pius Scîpiô_, father-in-law of Pompey.

#scîscitor, ârî, âtus sum# [#scîscô#], _to ask, inquire_.

#scîscô, ere, scîvî, scîtus# [#sciô#], _to seek to know_; _approve,
enact, decree_.

  #con--cônscîscô, ere, scîvî, scîtus#, _to approve of, decree_;
  #mortem sibi cônscîscere#, _to commit suicide_.

  #dê--dêscîscô, ere, scîvî, scîtum#, _to withdraw, desert, revolt_.

#scrîba, ae# [#scrîbô#], m., _a clerk, secretary_.

#scrîbô, ere, scrîpsî, scrîptus#, _to write_.

  #ad--adscrîbô, ere, scrîpsî, scrîptus#, _to add, include, enroll_.

  #con--cônscrîbô, ere, scrîpsî, scrîptus#, _to enroll, enlist_.

  #dê--dêscrîbô, ere, scrîpsî, scrîptus#, _to copy off, sketch,
  describe_.

  #dis--dîscrîbô, ere, scrîpsî, scrîptus#, _to mark off, divide_.

  #în--înscrîbô, ere, scrîpsî, scrîptus#, _to write on, inscribe on_.

  #per--perscrîbô, ere, scrîpsî, scrîptus#, _to write out_ (in full).

  #prô--prôscrîbô, ere, scrîpsî, scrîptus#, _to offer for sale_;
  _proscribe, outlaw_.

  #sub--subscrîbô, ere, scrîpsî, scrîptus#, _to write beneath_.

#scrînium, î#, n., _a case, box_ (esp. for books or papers).

#scrîptor, ôris# [#scrîbô#], m., _a writer, author_; _narrator_.

#Scultenna, ae#, f., a river in Cisalpine Gaul, near Mutina.

#scûtum, î#, n., _a shield_.

(1) #sê#, see #suî#.

(2) #sê# or #sêd#, insep. prefix, _apart, away from_.

#sêcêdô#, see #cêdô#.

#sêcernô#, see #cernô#.

#secô, âre, uî, tus#, _to cut_.

  #re--resecô, âre, uî, tus#, _to cut loose_ or _off_.

#sêcrêtus# [part. of #sêcernô#], adj., _separate_; _hidden, concealed_;
_secret_; abl. #sêcrêtô# as adv., _secretly_.

#sector, ârî, âtus sum# [freq. of #sequor#], _to follow eagerly, pursue,
seek the society of_.

#secundus# [#sequor#], adj., _following, second_; _favorable,
fortunate_.

#secûris, is# [#secô#], f., _an axe, hatchet_.

#secus#, comp. #sêtius#, adv., _otherwise, differently_.

#sed#, conj., _but, on the contrary_.

#sêdecim# [#sex# + #decem#], indecl. num. adj., _sixteen_.

#sedeô, êre, sêdî, sessum#, _to sit_.

  #ad--adsideô, êre, sêdî, sessus#, _to sit at_ or _beside, besiege_.

  #in--însideô, êre, sêdî, sessus#, with dat., _to sit in, on_, or
  _upon_; with acc., _to settle on, occupy_.

  #ob--obsideô, êre, sêdî, sessus#, _block, besiege, beset_.

#sêdês, is# [cf. #sedeô#], f., _seat, chair_; _residence, abode_.

#sêditiô, ônis# [#sêd# + #itiô#, from #eô, îre#], f., _dissension,
rebellion, revolt_.

#sêdûcô#, see #dûcô#.

#sêdulitâs, âtis# [#sêdulus#, _earnest_], f., _earnestness,
persistency_.

#sêdulô# [abl. of #sêdulus#, _earnest_], adv., _earnestly, busily_;
_purposely, deliberately_.

#sêgnis, ê#, adj., _slow, tardy, sluggish_.

#sêgniter# [#sêgnis#], adv., _without spirit_ or _vigor, lazily_.

#sella, ae# [#sedeô#], f., _a seat, chair_; #sella curûlis#, a portable
stool, with bent legs, made to open and shut like a camp-stool. Such
chairs were often of bronze, or of wood finely carved, and inlaid with
ivory, or even adorned with ornaments of gold. The right to use this
chair belonged at first only to the king, but later to curule aediles,
praetors, consuls, dictators, and the Flamines.

#semel#, adv., _once, once for all_.

#sêmet#, see #suî#.

#semper#, adv., _always, continually_.

#sempiternus# [#semper#], adj., _eternal_.

#Semprônius, î#, m., _Ti. Semprônius Longus_, defeated by Hannibal at
the Trebia B.C. 218.

#senâtor, ôris# [#senâtus#], m., _a senator_.

#senâtôrius# [#senâtor#], adj., _senatorial_.

#senâtus, ûs# [cf. #senex#], m., _council of elders, senate_, in the
time of the kings a mere advisory body, called together by the king when
he desired advice, but later the chief power in the Roman state.

#Seneca, ae#, m., _L. Annaeus Seneca_, the Stoic philosopher, tutor of
the Emperor Nero.

#senecta, ae# [#senex#], f., _old age_.

#senectûs, ûtis# [#senex#], f., _old age_.

#senex#, gen. #senis#, adj., _old_; comp. #senior#, _elder_; sup.
#mâximus# (#nâtû#), _eldest_. As noun, #senex, senis#, m., _an old man_;
#seniôrês, um#, pl. m., _the elders_ (men over 45).

#senior#, see #senex#.

#senium, î# [#senex#], n., _old age, decay_.

#sententia, ae# [#sentiô#], f., _opinion, thought_; _wish, inclination_.

#sentiô, îre, sênsî, sênsus#, _to discern by sense, feel_; _see,
perceive_; #bene sentîre dê#, _to think well of_.

  #con--cônsentiô, îre, sênsî, sênsum#, _to agree_; _conspire, plot_.

#sêparâtim# [(2) #sê# + #parô#], adv., _separately, apart_.

#sepeliô, îre, îvî (iî), sepultus#, _to bury, inter_.

#septem#, indecl. num. adj., _seven_.

#septênî, ae, a# [#septem#], num. adj., _seven each, seven apiece_.

#Septimulêius, î#, m., _L. Septimulêius_ of Anagnia in Latium, a friend
of Ti. Gracchus, who afterwards sold his head for gold.

#septimus# [#septem#], num. adj., _seventh_.

#septirêmis, e# [#septem# + #rêmus#, _oar_], f. (sc. #nâvis#), _a ship
with seven banks_ or _tiers of oars_.

#septuâgêsimus# [#septuâgintâ#, _seventy_], num. adj., _seventieth_.

#sepultûra, ae# [#sepeliô#], f., _burial, funeral_.

#sequor, î, secûtus sum#, _to follow_; _favor_.

  #ad--adsequor, î, secûtus sum#, _to follow up, overtake_; _gain,
  attain_.

  #con--cônsequor, î, secûtus sum#, _to follow, overtake_; _attain,
  acquire_.

  #in--însequor, î, secûtus sum#, _to pursue, overtake_.

  #ob--obsequor, î, secûtus sum#, _to comply with, yield to,
  submit to_.

  #per--persequor, î, secûtus sum#, _to follow persistently, pursue,
  hound_.

  #prô--prôsequor, î, secûtus sum#, _to follow, accompany, escort_.

  #sub--subsequor, î, secûtus sum#, _to follow after, follow_.

#Sergius, î#, m., a Roman gentile name.

  1. _L. Sergius Catilîna_, see #Catilîna#.

  2. _M. Sergius Catilîna_, grandfather of (1).

#sêriô# [abl. of #sêrius#], adv., _in earnest, seriously, in good
faith_.

#sêrius#, adj., _grave, serious, earnest_.

#sermô, ônis# [#serô#], m., _talk, conversation_; _speech_.

#serô, ere, --, tus#, _to bind together_.

  #con--cônserô, ere, uî, tus#, _to join_; #manûs# or #pûgnam
  cônserere#, _to join battle, fight_.

  #dê--dêserô, ere, uî, tus#, _to leave, abandon_; _forsake, neglect_.

  #dis--disserô, ere, uî, tus#, _to speak, discourse, harangue_.

  #ex--exserô, ere, uî, tus#, _to thrust out_.

#sêrô# [abl. of #sêrus#, _late_], adv., _late, too late_.

#Sertôrius, î#, m., _Quîntus_, an officer in the army of Marius. He went
to Spain as propraetor in B.C. 82, and maintained himself at the head of
an independent force till his death in 72.

#serva, ae# [#servus#], f., _a slave woman_.

#servîlis, e# [#servus#], adj., _of a slave_; _slavish, servile_.

#servitûs, ûtis# [#servus#], f., _slavery_.

#Servius, î#, m., see #Tullius#.

#servô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to save, preserve, watch_.

  #con--cônservô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to keep safe, preserve_.

#servus, î#, m., _a slave_.

#sêse#, see #suî#.

#sêstertius, î# [#sêmis#, _half_ + #tertius#], m. (sc. #nummus#), _a
sesterce_, a small silver coin equivalent orig. to two and one-half
asses, but later worth about four cents. See #âs#. In naming large sums
of money the Romans speak of 'so many times a hundred thousand
_sêstertiî_' (_centêna mîlia sêstertium_).

#sêtius#, see #secus#.

#seu#, see #sîve#.

#sevêrê# [#sevêrus#], adv., _gravely, severely, sternly, strictly_.

#sevêritâs, âtis# [#sevêrus#], f., _sternness, strictness_.

#sevêrus#, adj., _stern, strict, severe_.

#sex#, indecl. num. adj., _six_.

#sexâgintâ#, num. adj., _sixty_.

#Sextîlis, e#, adj., _of the sixth month_. As noun, #Sextîlis, is#, m.
(sc. #mênsis#), _August_. See #December#.

#Sextîlius, î#, m., praetor in Africa in B.C. 88.

#sextus# [#sex#], num. adj., _sixth_.

#Sextus, î#, m., a Roman praenomen.

#sî#, conj., _if, whether_; #quod sî#, _but if_.

#sibi#, see #suî#.

#sîbilus, î#, m., _a hissing, whistling_.

#Sibyllînus# [#Sibylla#, _a Sibyl, prophetess_], adj., _pertaining to
the Sibyls, Sibylline_.

#sîc#, adv., _in this way, thus, so_.

#siccô, âre, âvî, âtus# [#siccus#], _to drain_.

#siccus#, adj., _dry_. As noun, #siccum, î#, n., _the dry ground_.

#Sicilia, ae#, f., _Sicily_.

#Siculus#, adj., _Sicilian_.

#sîdô, sîdere, --, --#, _to seat one's self, sit down_.

  #ad--adsîdô, ere, sêdî, --#, _to seat one's self, sit down_.

  #con--cônsîdô, ere, sêdî, sessum#, _to sit down_; _settle, encamp_;
  _take a position_.

  #re--resîdô, ere, sêdî, --#, _to settle down, sink, subside_;
  _abate, grow calm_.

#sîgnificô, âre, âvî, âtus# [#sîgnum# + #faciô#], _to make signs, show_;
_point out, indicate_.

#sîgnô, âre, âvî, âtus# [#sîgnum#], _to set a mark on_; _sign, seal_
(a document).

  #ad--adsîgnô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to allot, award, assign_.

#sîgnum, î#, n., _sign, signal_; _military standard, ensign_; _statue,
image_; #sîgna înferre alicuî#, _to advance against_ or _attack any
one_.

#Sîlânus, î#, m., _D. Iûnius Sîlânus Mânliânus_, praetor in Macedonia
B.C. 142.

#silêns, entis# [orig. part. of #sileô#, _to be still_], adj., _still,
quiet, silent_.

#silentium, î# [#silêns#], n., _stillness, quiet, silence_.

#silva, ae#, f., _a wood, forest_.

#Silvia, ae#, f., see #Rhêa#.

#similis, e#, adj., _like, similar_.

#similiter# [#similis#], adv., _in like manner, similarly_.

#similitûdô, inis# [#similis#], f., _likeness, resemblance, similarity_.

#simul#, adv., _at the same time_; #simul atque# or #âc#, _as soon as_.

#simulô, âre, âvî, âtus# [#similis#], _to make like, copy_; _feign,
pretend_.

  #dis--dissimulô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to disguise, conceal, dissemble_.

#simultâs, âtis# [#simul#], f., _enmity, hatred_; #simultâtês gerere#,
_to carry on a feud_.

#sine#, prep, with abl., _without_.

#singulâris, e# [#singulî#], adj., _one by one, single, individual_;
_remarkable, singular, unparalleled_.

#singulî, ae, a#, adj., _one at a time, one apiece, single_.

#sinister, tra, trum#, adj., _left_.

#sinô, ere, sîvî, situs#, _to put, place_; _permit, let_.

#sinus, ûs#, m., _a curve, hollow, fold_; _fold of the toga_ (as it
crosses the breast), _pocket_; _bosom_.

#sistô, ere, stitî, status#, trans., _to cause to stand, place, set_;
intrans., _stand_.

  #ab--absistô, ere, stitî, --#, _to withdraw, cease, desist_.

  #con--cônsistô, ere, stitî, --#, _to stand, take position_ (of an
  army); _stop, halt_; _be firm, endure, continue_.

  #dê--dêsistô, ere, stitî, --#, _to stand off from, cease, desist_.

  #ex--exsistô, ere, stitî, --#, _to step forth_; _come to be, become,
  arise_.

  #ob--obsistô, ere, stitî, --#, _to stand in the way of, resist,
  oppose_.

  #re--resistô, ere, stitî, --#, _to oppose, withstand, resist_.

  #sub--subsistô, ere, stitî, --#, _to take a stand, remain, tarry_.

#situs# [orig. part. of #sinô#], adj., _placed, situate, lying_.

#situs, ûs# [#sinô#], m., _location, site_.

#sîve# or #seu#, conj., _or, or if, whether_; #sîve . . . sîve# or #seu
. . . seu#, _whether . . . or, if . . . or if_.

#sôbrius#, adj., _sober, temperate_.

#socer, socerî#, m., _a father-in-law_.

#societâs, âtis# [#socius#], f., _fellowship, association_; _alliance_.

#sociô, âre, âvî, âtus# [#socius#], _to join, unite_; _hold in common,
share, divide_.

#socius, î#, m., _fellow, comrade, ally_.

#sodâlis, is#, m., _companion, associate_.

#sôl, sôlis#, m., _the sun_.

#soleô, êre, itus sum#, _to be wont, be accustomed, use_.

#sôlitârius# [#sôlus#], adj., _lonely, isolated_.

#sôlitûdô, inis# [#solus#], f., _loneliness_; _lonely place,
wilderness_.

#solitus# [#soleô#], adj., _wonted, usual, accustomed_; as noun,
#solitum, î#, n., _the customary, the usual_.

#solium, î#, n., _chair of state, throne_.

#sollemnis, e#, adj., _religiously fixed, holy, sacred_.

#sollicitô, âre, âvî, âtus# [#sollicitus#, _troubled_], _to stir up,
arouse, excite_.

#sôlum# [#sôlus#], adv., _only_; #nôn . . . sôlum . . . sed . . .
etiam#, _not only . . . but also_.

#sôlus#, adj., _alone, single-handed, single, only_; _lonely, solitary_.

#solvô, ere, î, solûtus#, _to loosen, unbind_; _let down_; _impair,
destroy_.

  #ab--absolvô, ere, î, solûtus#, _to set free, release_; _acquit_.

  #re--resolvô, ere, î, solûtus#, _to loosen_; _dissolve, melt_.

#somnium, î# [#somnus#], n., _a dream, vision_.

#somnus, î#, m., _sleep_.

#sonitus, ûs# [#sonô#, _to resound_], m., _sound, crash, noise_.

#sôpiô, îre, îvî (iî), îtus# [cf. #sopor#, _a deep sleep_], _to put to
sleep_; pass., _to sleep_; #sôpîtî#, _buried in slumber_.

#soror, ôris#, f., _a sister_.

#sorôrius# [#soror#], adj., _of a sister, sister's_.

#sors, sortis#, f., _lot, fate, destiny_; _decision by lot_.

#sortior, îrî, îtus sum# [#sors#], _to cast lots_; _obtain by lot_.

#spatium, î#, n., _space, room_; _distance_; _period of time_.

#speciês, --#, acc. em, abl. #ê# [#*speciô#], f., _sight, appearance_;
_semblance, pretense_.

#*speciô, ere, spexî, --#, _to look_.

  #ad--adspiciô, ere, spexî, spectus#, _to look at, examine, inspect_.

  #con--cônspiciô, ere, spexî, spectus#, _to catch sight of, spy_;
  _see_.

  #dê--dêspiciô, ere, spexî, spectus#, _to look down upon, despise_.

  #dîs--dîspiciô, ere, spexî, spectus#, _to descry, perceive_.

  #in--înspiciô, ere, spexî, spectus#, _to look into, examine,
  consider_.

  #re--respiciô, ere, spexî, spectus#, _to look back_ (_at_), _gaze
  at, consider_; _regard, respect_.

#spectâculum, î# [#spectô#], n., _show, sight, spectacle_.

#spectâtor, ôris# [#spectô#], m., _spectator_.

#spectô, âre, âvî, âtus# [freq. of #*speciô#], _to look at, watch,
behold_.

  #ex--exspectô, âre, âvî, âtus#, trans., _to look out for, await,
  expect_; intrans., _wait, wait to see_.

#speculâtor, ôris# [#speculor#], m., _a lookout, spy, scout_.

#speculor, ârî, âtus sum# [#specula#, _a watch-tower_], _to spy out,
examine_.

#speculum, î# [#*speciô#], n., _a looking-glass, mirror_ (usually of
metal).

#spernô, ere, sprêvî, sprêtus#, _to set aside, despise, scorn_.

  #ab--âspernor, ârî, âtus sum#, _to disdain, despise, scorn_.

#spêrô, âre, âvî, âtus# [#spês#], _to hope_ (for), _look for, expect_.

  #dê--dêspêrô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to lose hope, despair, despair of_.

#spês, speî#, f., _hope, expectation_; _promise_.

#spîritus, ûs# [#spîrô#], m., _breath_; _disposition, lofty spirit,
ambition, pride_.

#spîrô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to breathe_.

  #ex--exspîrô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to breathe out_; _die, expire_
  (sc. #animam#).

  #re--respîrô, âre, âvî, âtum#, _to breathe back_ or _out, breathe_
  (again); intrans., _to recover breath, revive_.

#splendor, ôris# [#splendeô#, _to shine_], m., _brightness, splendor,
magnificence_.

#spoliô, âre, âvî, âtus# [#spolium#], _to strip, rob, plunder_.

#spolium, î#, n., _booty, spoil_.

#spondeô, êre, spopondî, spônsus#, _to promise_ (sacredly), _agree_.

  #dê--dêspondeô, êre, î, spônsus#, _to promise in marriage, betroth_.

  #re--respondeô, êre, î, spônsus#, _to answer, reply_; _correspond
  to, agree with_.

#spônsus, î# [#spondeô#], m., _a lover, betrothed man_.

#sponte# [abl. of #*spôns#, _free will_], f., _voluntarily_; with #meâ,
tuâ#, or #suâ#, _of my, your_, or _his own free will_.

#Spûrinna, ae#, m., _Vestritius Spûrinna_, an augur of the time of
Julius Caesar.

#squâma, ae#, f., _scale_ (of fish or snake).

#statim# [cf. #stô#], adv., _instantly, at once_.

#statiô, ônis# [#stô#], f., _station, post_; _picket line, guard_.

#statua, ae# [#statuô#], f., _a statue, image_.

#statuô, ere, î, ûtus# [#stô#], _to cause to stand, set up, place_;
_determine_; _determine on, appoint, arrange_.

  #con--cônstituô, ere, î, ûtus#, _to set up, erect_; _set in order,
  organize_; _arrange, appoint_; _resolve_.

  #in--înstituô, ere, î, ûtus#, _to set in place, arrange_; _found,
  establish_; _determine, undertake, begin_; _train, teach_.

  #re--restituô, ere, î, ûtus#, _to set up again, replace, restore,
  reinstate_; _repair, remedy, save_.

  #sub--substituô, ere, î, ûtus#, _to put in place of, substitute_;
  _put_.

#statûra, ae# [#stô#], f., _size, height, stature_.

#status, ûs# [#stô#], m., _state, condition, rank_.

#stercus, oris#, n., _dung, manure_.

#Sthenius, î#, m., _a Sicilian chief_.

#sternô, ere, strâvî, strâtus#, _to spread out, scatter_; _lay low_.

  #con--cônsternô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to terrify, frighten, confound_;
  _move deeply, affect powerfully_.

  #prô--prôsternô, ere, strâvî, strâtus#, _to overthrow, destroy_.

#stimulus, î#, m., _goad_; _sharp point, prick_.

#stinguô, ere, --, --#, _to quench_.

  #ex--exstinguô, ere, stînxî, stînctus#, _to extinguish_; _destroy,
  kill_.

  #re--restinguô, ere, stînxî, stînctus#, _to quench, extinguish,
  destroy_.

#stîpendium, î# [#stips#, _gift_ + #pendô#], n., _a payment_; _salary,
pay_; _campaign_; #stîpendia facere# or #merêre#, _to serve a campaign_.

#stirps, stirpis#, f., _stock, race_; _offspring, progeny_.

#stô, stâre, stetî, statum#, _to stand_; _stand firm, abide_; #stâre
prômissô#, _to stand by_ (lit., _on_) _one's promise_.

  #circum--circumstô, âre, stitî, --#, _to stand about, surround_.

  #con--cônstô, âre, stitî, --#, _to agree_; _stand firm, be fixed_;
  _consist of_; #cônstat#, _it is agreed, it is well known, it is
  certain_; #sibi cônstâre#, _to be consistent_.

  #ex--exstô, âre, stitî, --#, _to be extant, remain, exist_.

  #prae--praestô, âre, stitî, stitus#, intrans., _to stand before,
  surpass, excel_; trans., _to show, make, render_.

#stolidê# [#stolidus#, _stupid_], adv., _stupidly_.

#strâgês, is# [#sternô#], f., _overthrow, ruin, defeat_; _massacre_.

#strâgulum, î# [#sternô#], n., _coverlet, bedspread_.

#strênuus#, adj., _brisk, active, vigorous_.

#strepitus, ûs# [#strepô#, _to make a noise_], m., _noise, din, crash_;
_applause_.

#stringô, ere, strinxî, strictus#, _to draw_ or _bind tight_, _press
together, graze_; _draw, unsheathe_ (a sword or dagger).

  #dê--dêstringô, ere, strinxî, strictus#, _to draw, unsheathe_.

  #per--perstringô, ere, strinxî, strictus#, _to touch, graze_;
  _thrill, run through_.

#struô, ere, strûxî, strûctus#, _to pile up, arrange_; _build, erect_.

  #ex--exstruô, ere, strûxî, strûctus#, _to pile_ or _heap up, build_.

  #in--înstruô, ere, strûxî, strûctus#, _to build_; _arrange, draw up_
  or _array_ (troops); _make ready, equip, fit out_.

#studiôsê# [#studiôsus#, _eager_], adv., _eagerly, zealously_.

#studium, î# [#studeô#, _to be eager_], n., _zeal, enthusiasm_; _desire,
pursuit, study_; _good-will, affection_.

#stultitia, ae# [#stultus#], f., _folly_.

#stultus#, adj., _foolish, silly_.

#stupêns, entis# [orig. part. of #stupeô#], adj., _dazed, confused,
dumbfounded_.

#stupeô, êre, uî, --#, _to be struck senseless, be amazed_ or
_astounded_.

#suâdeô, êre, suâsî, suâsûrus#, _to advise, urge, exhort_.

  #dis--dissuâdeô, êre, suâsî, suâsus#, _to advise against, oppose_
  (by argument).

  #per--persuâdeô, êre, suâsî, suâsûrus#, _to persuade, induce_;
  _convince_.

#sub#, prep. with (1) acc., _under, towards, until, after_; (2) with
abl., _under, beneath, at the foot of, close to_; _in the reign of_; in
composition, _under, somewhat_; _in place of_; _underhandedly_.

#subdô#, see #dô#.

#subdûcô#, see #dûcô#.

#subeô#, see (1) #eô#.

#subiciô#, see #iaciô#.

#subigô#, see #agô#.

#subitus# [#subeô#], adj., _sudden, unexpected_; abl. #subitô# as adv.,
_on short notice, suddenly_.

#sublâtus#, see #tollô#.

#sublicius# [#sublica#, _a pile_], adj., _consisting of_ or _resting on
piles_.

#sublîmis, e#, adj., _uplifted, lofty_; _on high, through the sky_.

#submittô#, see #mittô#.

#submoveô#, see #moveô#.

#subolês, is#, f., _a sprout, shoot_; _offspring, issue_; _race_.

#subôrnô#, see #ôrnô#.

#subscrîbô#, see #scrîbô#.

#subsellium, î# [#sub# + #sella#], n., _a low bench, seat_.

#subsequor#, see #sequor#.

#subsidium, î# [cf. #subsîdô#, _to lie in wait_], n., _reserve troops_;
_aid, help_.

#subsistô#, see #sistô#.

#substituô#, see #statuô#.

#subtexô, ere, uî, tus# [#sub# + #texô#, _to weave_], _to weave under,
join_; _subjoin, add_ (in speech).

#succêdô#, see #cêdô#.

#succêssor, ôris# [#succêdô#], m., _follower, successor_.

#succêssus, ûs# [#succêdô#], m., _favorable outcome, success_.

#succingô#, see #cingô#.

#succlâmô#, see #clâmô#.

#succurrô#, see #currô#.

#suêscô, ere, suêvî, suêtus#, _to become accustomed to_.

  #ad--adsuêscô, ere, suêvî, suêtus#, _to accustom one's self to, be
  wont_.

  #con--cônsuêscô, ere, suêvî, suêtus#, _to become accustomed_.

#sufficiô#, see #faciô#.

#suffîgô#, see #fîgô#.

#suffôcô, âre, âvî, âtus# [#sub# + #fauces#, _the throat_], _to choke,
strangle_.

#suffodiô#, see #fodiô#.

#suffrâgâtor, ôris# [#suffrâgor#, _to vote for_], m., _supporter,
partisan, follower_.

#suffrâgium, î#, n., _a voting tablet, vote, ballot_.

#suî# gen., #sibi# dat., #sê# acc. and abl. of the reflexive pron.,
sing. and pl., _himself, herself, itself, themselves_; #sêse, sêmet#,
strengthened forms of #sê#.

#Sulla, ae#, m., a cognomen in the Cornelian gens.

  1. _L. Cornêlius Sulla_, surnamed Fêlîx, born B.C. 138; consul in
  88; commanded against Mithridates 88-84; fought Marius in 88, and
  again in 83, 82, becoming master of Italy. He was then chosen
  perpetual dictator, and made many changes in the constitution. He
  resigned the dictatorship in 79, and died next year.

  2. _P. Cornêlius Sulla_, nephew of (1), defended in 62 B.C. by
  Cicero from a charge of complicity in Catiline's conspiracy.

#Sullânus#, adj., _of_ or _by Sulla, Sullan_; as noun, #Sullânî, ôrum#,
pl. m., _the followers of Sulla_.

#Sulpicius, î#, m., _Ser. Sulpicius Rûfus_, tribune of the people in 88
B.C., and a supporter of Marius.

#sum, esse, fuî, futûrus#, _to be, exist, live_; with gen., _belong to,
be the part of_; _be true, be so_; _happen, take place_; with dat.,
_have, possess_.

  #ab--absum, esse, âfuî#, _to be away_ or _absent, be far from_;
  #prope abesse#, _to be at no great distance, be near_.

  #ad--adsum, esse, adfuî#, _to be present_ or _near_; _to aid_ (esp.
  in court).

  #dê--dêsum, deesse, dêfuî#, _to be away_ or _absent_; _be wanting_;
  _fail_; _to miss, let slip_.

  #in--însum, inesse, înfuî#, _to be in_ or _on_; _belong to_.

  #inter--intersum, esse, fuî#, _to be present at, take part in_.

  #prae--praesum, praeesse, fuî#, _to be over_ or _before_; _rule,
  govern, be in command of_.

  #prô--prôsum, prôdesse, prôfuî#, _to benefit, profit, aid_.

  #super--supersum, esse, fuî#, _to be over_ and _above, remain_;
  _survive, outlive_.

#summa, ae# [#summus#], f., _top, summit_; _chief point_ or _place,
supremacy_; _total, amount, sum_.

#summus#, see #superus#.

#sûmô, ere, sûmpsî, sûmptus# [#sub# + #emô#], _to take up, take,
choose_; _enter upon, begin_; _spend_.

  #ab--absûmô, ere, sûmpsî, sûmptus#, _to use up, consume_; _spend_.

  #ad--adsûmô, ere, sûmpsî, sûmptus#, _to take to one's self,
  receive_.

  #con--cônsûmô, ere, sûmpsî, sûmptus#, _to use up, spend_.

#sûmptuârius# [#sûmptus#], adj., _relating to expense, sumptuary_.

#sûmptus, ûs# [#sûmô#], m., _outlay, expense_.

#supellex, supellectilis#, f., _household stuff, furniture_.

#super#, prep. (1) with acc., _over, above, upon, in addition to_;
_during_; (2) with abl., _over, upon, beyond, in addition to_.

#superbê# [#superbus#], adv., _haughtily, proudly, arrogantly_.

#superbia, ae# [#superbus#], f., _pride, arrogance_.

#superbus# [#super#], adj., _haughty, proud, arrogant, insolent_.

#Superbus, î#, m., see #Tarquinius#.

#superiaciô#, see #iaciô#.

#superior#, see #superus#.

#superô, âre, âvî, âtus# [#superus#], _to pass over, cross_; _overcome,
subdue, conquer_; _excel, surpass_.

#supersum#, see #sum#.

#superus# [#super#], adj., _above, upper, higher_; comp. #superior#,
_higher, superior, earlier_; as noun, _a superior_; sup. #suprêmus#,
_highest, topmost, last_, or #summus#, _highest, greatest, extreme, most
distinguished_; _often the highest part of, top of_; #Mare Superum#,
_the Upper_ or _Adriatic Sea_.

#superveniô#, see #veniô#.

#supervîvô#, see #vîvô#.

#supplex, icis# [#sub# + #plicô#, _to fold, bend_], adj., bending the
knees in entreaty, _begging, suppliant_; as noun, _a suppliant_.

#suppliciter# [#supplex#], adv., _suppliantly, humbly_.

#supplicium, î# [#supplex#], n., _a kneeling down_ (as suppliant, or to
receive punishment); _punishment, execution_.

#supplicô, âre, âvî, âtum# [#supplex#], _to kneel down_; _entreat,
beseech_; _pray, worship_; _thank_.

#suprâ# [#super#], adv., _above_.

#surgô, ere, surrêxî, surrêctum# [#sub# + #regô#], _to stand up, rise,
arise_.

  #ad--adsurgô, ere, surrêxî, --#, _to rise up, arise_.

#suscipiô#, see #capiô#.

#sûspectus# [orig. part. of #sûspiciô#, _to suspect_], adj.,
_mistrusted, suspected_.

#suspendium, î#, n., _hanging_.

#sustineô#, see #teneô#.

#sûtor, ôris# [#suô#, _to sew, stitch_], m., _a shoemaker, cobbler_.

#suus# [#suî#], adj., _his own, her own, its own, their own_; _his, her,
its, their_; as noun, #suî, ôrum#, pl. m., _his_ (their) _friends,
followers, soldiers_ or _fellow-citizens_.

#Syphâx, âcis#, m., a prince of Numidia.

#Syria, ae#, f., _Syria_, a country on the eastern coast of the
Mediterranean.


#T#

#T.#, abbreviation of the name #Titus#.

#tabella, ae# [dim. of #tabula#], f., _a small board, writing tablet_.

#taberna, ae#, f., _stall, shop_ (of boards); _hut, tent_.

#tabernâculum, î# [#taberna#], n., _a tent_.

#tabula, ae#, f., _a board, plank_; _picture_ (sc. #picta#, _painted_);
_writing tablet_; _record, list_.

#taceô, êre, uî, --#, _to be silent, say nothing_.

#tacitus# [#taceô#], adj., _silent, secret_.

#taedium, î# [#taedet#, _it wearies_], n., _weariness, disgust,
loathing_.

#talentum, î#, n., _a talent_, a Greek money measure, worth about $1100.

#tâlis, e#, adj., such, _of such a kind_; #tâlis . . . quâlis#, _such
. . . as_.

#tam#, adv., _to such a degree, so much, as much, so_; #tam . . . quam#,
_as . . . so, not only . . . but also_.

#tamdiû#, adv., _so long_.

#tamen#, adv., _yet, still, for all that, all the same, however,
nevertheless_.

#tamquam#, conj., _as if_.

#Tanaquil, îlis#, f., the wife of Tarquinius Priscus.

#tandem#, adv., _at length, at last, finally_.

#tangô, ere, tetigî tâctus#, _to touch_.

  #con--contingô, ere, tigî, tâctus#, with acc., _to touch_; with
  dat., _to occur to, fall to lot of, befall_; _happen_.

  #ob--obtingô, ere, tigî, --#, _to fall to the lot of, befall_;
  _occur_.

#tantum# [#tantus#], adv., _so much_ (and no more), _only, merely_.

#tantummodô# [#tantum# + #modô#], adv., _only, merely_.

#tantus#, adj., _so great, such_; as noun, #tantum, î#, n., _so much_.

#tardê# [#tardus#, _slow_], adv., _slowly_.

#tarditâs, âtis# [#tardus#, _slow_], f., _slowness, sluggishness_.

#tardô, âre, âvî, âtus# [#tardus#, _slow_], _to delay, hinder, impede_.

#Tarentînus#, adj., of _Tarentum, Tarentine_; as noun, #Tarentînî,
ôrum#, pl. m., _the people of Tarentum_.

#Tarentum, î#, n., a flourishing Greek city on the southern coast of
Italy; modern _Taranto_.

#Tarpêia, ae#, f., a Roman maiden of the time of Romulus.

#Tarpêius#, adj., _of Tarpeia, Tarpeian_; #rûpês Tarpêia#, _the
Tarpeian_ rock, a part of the Capitoline Hill, on the side toward the
Forum.

(1) #Tarquiniî, ôrum#, pl. m., a city in Etruria.

(2) #Tarquiniî, ôrum#, pl. m., _the Tarquin family, the Tarquins_.

#Tarquinius, î#, m., the name of a gens in early Rome, said to have come
from Etruria.

  1. _Tarquinius Prîscus_, the fifth king of Rome.

  2. _Tarquinius Superbus_, the last king of Rome, expelled B.C. 509.

  3. _Sextus Tarquinius_, son of (2).

  4. _L. Tarquinius Collâtinus_, cousin of (3), and husband of Lucretia.

#Tatius, î#, m., #Titus Tatius#, a Sabine king, and joint ruler with
Romulus.

#têctum, î# [#tegô#], n., _a covering, roof_; _covered structure,
house_.

#tegô, ere, têxî, têctus#, _to cover_; _hide, conceal_; _defend, guard_.

  #dê--dêtegô, ere, têxî, têctus#, _to uncover, expose_; _betray_.

#têgula, ae# [#tego#], f., _roof tile, tile_.

#têlum, î#, n., _missile_; _spear, javelin_.

#temerârius# [#temerê#], adj., _heedless, rash, reckless_.

#temerê#, adv., _blindly, rashly, heedlessly_.

#temeritâs, âtis# [#temerê#], f., _rashness, heedlessness, temerity_.

#temperâns, antis# [orig. part. of #temperô#], adj., _moderate,
temperate, sober_.

#temperô, âre, âvî, âtus# [#tempus#], _to set bounds to, restrain_.

#tempestâs, âtis# [#tempus#], f., _point_ or _period of time; storm,
tempest_.

#templum, î#, n., _a sacred spot_; _temple_.

#tempus, oris#, n., _time, period, season_; _opportunity, occasion_.

#tendô, ere, tetendî, tentus# and #tênsus#, _to spread out, stretch_;
#însidiâs tendere#, _to lay a trap for, plot against_.

  #con--contendô, ere, î, tentus#, _to stretch_; _exert one's self,
  strive, insist_; _hasten, march quickly_.

  #in--intendô, ere, î, tentus#, _to stretch, stretch, towards_; _aim,
  direct_.

  #ob(s)--ostendô, ere, î, tentus#, _to stretch out, show_; _produce,
  furnish_; _disclose, make known_.

  #por (= prô)--portendô, ere, î, tentus#, _to point out, indicate_;
  _foreshadow, portend_.

  #prô--prôtendô, ere, î, tentus#, _to stretch out, extend_.

#tenebrae, ârum#, pl. f., _darkness, gloom_; _a hiding place_.

#tenebricôsus# [#tenebrae#], adj., _dark, gloomy_.

#teneô, êre, uî, tentus#, _to hold, keep_; _possess_; _maintain, guard,
defend_; _seize_.

  #ab--abstineô, êre, uî, tentus#, _to hold back_ or _from_; _keep
  aloof from_; _refrain from, abstain_.

  #con--contineô, êre, uî, tentus#, _to keep, hold, contain_;
  _restrain, rule, curb_.

  #dê--dêtineô, êre, uî, tentus#, _to hold back_ or _off_; _detain,
  hinder_.

  #ob--obtineô, êre, uî, tentus#, _to hold, possess_; _rule, govern_.

  #per--pertineô, êre, uî, --#, _to stretch out, extend_; _reach_.

  #re--retineô, êre, uî, tentus#, _to keep_ or _hold_ (back), _retain,
  detain_.

  #sub(s)--sustineô, êre, uî, tentus#, _to hold up, support, sustain_;
  _bear, endure_; _hold in check, restrain_.

#tentô, âre, âvî, âtus# [freq. of #tendô#], _to touch, handle_; _try,
attempt_; _sound, try to win over_.

#tentôrium, î# [#tendô#], n., _a tent_.

#ter#, num. adv., _thrice, three times_.

#Terentius, î#, m., a Roman gentile name. See #Varrô#.

#Terentius, î#, m., a comrade of Pompey the Great.

#tergiversor, ârî, --# [#tergum# + #vertô#], _to twist and turn,
shuffle, evade_.

#tergum, î#, n., _back, rear_.

#ternî, ae, a# [cf. #três#], num. adj., _three on each side, by threes,
three_.

#terô, ere, trîvî, trîtus#, _to rub, wear away_; _waste, kill_.

#terra, ae#, f., _the earth, ground_; _land_.

#terreô, êre, uî, itus#, _to frighten, alarm, terrify_; _deter_.

  #dê--dêterreô, êre, uî, itus#, _to frighten off, deter, keep from_.

#terribilis, e# [#terreô#], adj., _frightful, dreadful_.

#terror, ôris# [#terreô#], m., _fear, panic_.

#tertius# [cf. #três#], adj., _third_; abl. n. #tertiô# as adv., _the
third time_.

#têstimônium, î# [#têstis#, _a witness_], n., _evidence, testimony,
proof_.

#têstor, ârî, âtus sum# [#têstis#, _a witness_], _to bear witness, be a
witness_.

#Teutobochus, î#, m., a chief of the Teutones.

#Teutonês, um#, pl. m., _the Teutones_, a Germanic people which invaded
Italy, but was defeated by Marius.

#thêsaurus, î#, m., _a treasure, hoard_.

#Thessalia, ae#, f., _Thessaly_, a large district in the northeastern
part of Greece.

#Ti.#, abbreviation of the name #Tiberius#.

#Tiberis, is#, m., _the river Tiber_.

#Tiberius, î#, m., a Roman praenomen.

#Tîcinus, î#, m., _the Ticinus_, a river in Cisalpine Gaul, tributary to
the Po.

#tigillum, î# [dim. of #tîgnum#, _beam_], n., _a little beam_.

#Tigrânês, is#, m., a king of Armenia, son-in-law of Mithridates.

#timeô, êre, uî, --#, _to be afraid, fear_.

#timidus# [#timeô#], adj., _fearful, timid_.

#tîrôcinium, î# [#tîrô#, _a raw recruit_], n., _a soldier's first
campaign_; _military inexperience_.

#titulus, î#, m., _inscription, placard, notice_.

#Titus, î#, m., a Roman praenomen.

#toga, ae#, f., _the toga_, the characteristic outer robe of the Romans.
See also #praetextus#.

#togâtus# [#toga#], adj., _clad in the toga_; _in peaceful garb,
unarmed_.

#tollô, ere, sustulî, sublâtus#, _to lift, raise, take up_; _remove,
abolish_.

#tonitrus, ûs# [#tonô#, _to thunder_], m., _thunder, peal of thunder_.

#tônsor, ôris# [#tondeô#, _to shear_], m., _a barber_.

#tônsôrius# [#tônsor#], adj., _of a barber, barber's_.

#Tôranius, î#, m., _Titus_, who betrayed his father to the second
triumvirate.

#Torquâtus, î# [#torquis#], m., a cognomen common in the Manlian gens.

  1. _T. Mânlius Torquâtus_, dictator in 353 and 349 B.C., consul 347,
  344, and 340.

  2. _T. Mânlius Torquâtus_, son of (1), put to death by his father
  for disobedience of orders.

#torqueô, êre, torsî, tortus#, _to turn, twist_; _torture, torment_.

#torquis, is# [#torqueô#], m., _a twisted collar, necklace_.

#torvê# [#torvus#, _grim_], adv., _sternly, grimly_.

#tot#, indecl. adj., _so many_.

#totidem# [#tot#], indecl. adj., _just as many, the same number of_.

#totiêns# [#tot#], adv., _so many times, so often_.

#tôtus#, gen. #tôtîus#, dat. #tôtî#, adj., _all, all the, the whole,
entire_.

#trâdô#, see #dô#.

#trâdûcô#, see #dûcô#.

#trahô, ere, trâxî, trâctus#, _to draw, drag_; _detain_.

  #ab--abstrahô, ere, trâxî, trâctus#, _to drag off_ or _away_; _carry
  off_.

  #con--contrahô, ere, trâxî, trâctus#, _to draw together, collect,
  assemble_.

  #dê--dêtrahô, ere, trâxî, trâctus#, _to draw_ or _strip off,
  remove_; _drag_.

  #dis--distrahô, ere, trâxî, trâctus#, _to pull asunder, part,
  separate_.

  #ex--extrahô, ere, trâxî, trâctus#, _to draw_ or _pull out_;
  _prolong, waste_.

  #per--pertrahô, ere, trâxî, trâctus#, _to draw along, drag_; _lead_.

  #re--retrahô, ere, trâxî, trâctus#, _to draw_ or _drag back_.

#trâiciô#, see #iaciô#.

#trânô#, see #nô#.

#trâns#, prep. with acc., _across, beyond, over_.

#trânscendô#, see #scandô#.

#trânseô#, see (1) #eô#.

#transferô#, see #ferô#.

#trânsfîgô#, see #fîgô#.

#trânsfodiô#, see #fodiô#.

#trânsfugiô#, see #fugiô#.

#trânsgredior#, see #gradior#.

#trânsigô#, see #agô#.

#trânsiliô#, see #saliô#.

#trânsmittô#, see #mittô#.

#trânsversus# [#trâns# + #vertô#], adj., _turned across, crosswise_;
_out of the way_.

#Trasumênus, î#, m., a lake in Etruria, famous as the scene of
Hannibal's victory over the Romans in B.C. 217.

#Trebia, ae#, f., _the Trebia_, a small tributary of the Po, near
Placentia.

#trecentêsimus# [#trecentî#], num. adj., _three hundredth_.

#trecentî, ae, a# [#três# + #centum#], num. adj., _three hundred_.

#tredecim# [#três# + #decem#], indecl. num. adj., _thirteen_.

#tremô, ere, uî, --#, _to quake, tremble_.

#trepidâtiô, ônis# [#trepidô#], f., _alarm, confusion_.

#trepidô, âre, âvî, --#, _to be in alarm_ or _confusion_; _tremble,
waver_.

#três, tria#, num. adj., _three_.

#tribûnal, âlis# [#tribûnus#], n., _a judgment seat, tribunal_.

#tribûnâtus, ûs# [#tribûnus#], m., _the tribuneship, office of tribune_.

#tribûnîcius# [#tribûnus#], adj., _of a tribune, tribunitial_.

#tribûnus, î# [#tribus#], m., _chief of a tribe, tribune_; #tribûnus
mîlitum# or #mîlitâris#, _military tribune, captain_, one of the minor
officers of a legion, six in number; #tribûnus plêbis#, _tribune of the
people_, elected from the plebeians. The office was created in 494 B.C.
to protect the plebeians against the patricians. Ten _tribûnî plêbis_
were elected annually. Their persons were sacred.

#tribuô, ere, î, ûtus# [#tribus#], _to assign, grant, give_.

  #dis--distribuô, ere, î, ûtus#, _to divide, distribute, apportion_.

#tribus, ûs# [cf. #três#], f., _a tribe_ (orig. a third part of the
people).

#tribûtum, î# [#tribuô#], n., _tax, tribute_.

#triennium, î# [#três# + #annus#], n., _the space of three years, three
years_.

#trigeminî, ae, a# [#três# + #geminus#], adj., _born three at a birth_;
as noun, pl. m., _triplets_.

#trîgintâ#, indecl. num. adj., _thirty_.

#trîstis, e#, adj., _sad, sorrowful_; _stern, severe_.

#triumphâlis, e# [#triumphus#], adj., _pertaining to a triumph,
triumphal_.

#triumphô, âre, âvî, âtum# [#triumphus#], _to celebrate a triumph,
triumph_.

#triumphus, î#, m., _a triumph_, the splendid procession in which the
victorious general entered the city, accompanied by his soldiers and the
spoil and captives he had taken. The procession passed round the
Capitoline Hill into the Via Sacra, then into the Forum, and on up to
the temple of Jupiter Capitolinus.

#triumvir, virî# [#três# + #vir#], m., _a triumvir_, one of a board of
three commissioners.

#tropaeum, î#, n., _a trophy, sign of victory_, made usually by
fastening captured arms to the trunk of a tree.

#trucîdô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to cut to pieces, slaughter, butcher_.

#truncus, î#, m., _stem, trunk_ (of a tree); _trunk, body_.

#tû, tuî#, pl. #vôs, vestrum# or #vestrî#, pers. pron., _thou, you_.

#tueor, êrî, itus sum#, _to look at, watch_; _defend, protect_.

  #in--intueor, êrî, itus sum#, _to look closely at or upon, gaze at_.

#Tullius, î#, m., the name of a Roman gens.

  1. _Servius Tullius_, sixth king of Rome.

  2. _M. Tullius Cicerô_, the orator. See #Cicerô#.

#Tullus, î#, m., praenomen of _Tullus Hostîlius_, third king of Rome.

#tum#, adv., _then, at that time_; _thereupon_.

#tumultuor, ârî, âtus sum# [#tumultus#], _to make a disturbance, riot_.

#tumultus, ûs#, m., _a disturbance, uproar_; _rebellion, riot_.

#tumulus, î# [#tumeô#, _to swell_], m., _a hillock, mound, hill_.

#tunc#, adv., _then, at that time_; _accordingly, thereupon_.

#turba, ae#, f., _a hubbub, crowd, throng_.

#turbulentus# [#turba#], adj., _stormy, confused, troubled_.

#turdus, î#, m., _a thrush, fieldfare_.

#turma, ae#, f., _a troop_ or _squadron_ (of cavalry).

#turpis, e#, adj., _ugly_; _base, dishonorable_.

#turris, is#, m., _tower, castle_; _howdah_.

#tûs, tûris#, n., _incense_.

#tûtêla, ae# [#tueor#], f., _protection, guardianship_.

(1) #tûtor, ôris# [#tueor#], m., _protector, guardian_.

(2) #tûtor, ârî, âtus sum# [freq. of #tueor#], _to guard, protect_.

#tûtus# [orig. part. of #tueor#], adj., _safe_; #tûtô#, abl. as adv.,
_safely_.


#U#

#ûber, eris#, n., _teat, dug, udder_.

#ubi#, interr. adv., _where? when?_ As conj. interr. and rel., _where,
when_.

#ulcîscor, î, ultus sum#, _to punish, avenge_.

#ûllus#, gen. #ûllîus#, adj., _any, any one_.

#ulterior, ius#, gen. #ôrîs# [#ultrâ#], adj., _farther, remoter_; sup.
#ultimus#, _farthest, last, utmost, greatest_; #ultima manus#,
_finishing touches_; #ulterius#, adv., _beyond, farther, more, longer_;
#ultimum#, adv., _for the last time_.

#ultimum, ultimus#, see #ulterior#.

#ultiô, ônis# [#ulcîscor#], f., _revenge_.

#ultrâ#, adv., and prep. with acc., _on the other side, beyond_; #ultrâ
fidem#, _incredibly_.

#ultrô#, adv., _of one's own accord, voluntarily_.

#umbra, ae#, f., _shadow, shade_.

#umerus, î#, m., _the shoulder_.

#umquam#, adv., _at any time, ever_.

#unde#, adv. (1) interr., _whence? from whom, from which?_ (2) rel.,
_whence, from whom, from which_; _wherefore_.

#ûndecim# [#ûnus# + #decem#], indecl. num. adj., _eleven_.

#undique#, adv., _from all sides_; _on all sides, everywhere_.

#unguis, is#, m., _a_ (finger) _nail_.

#ûniversus# [#ûnus# + #vertô#], adj., _all in one, whole, entire_.

#ûnus#, gen. #unîus#, adj., _one, only, sole, alone_; #ûnus quisque#,
_each one_.

#urbânus# [#urbs#], adj., _of_ or _in the city_, esp. _in Rome_;
_refined, witty_; as noun, #urbânî, ôrum#, pl. m., _city people_; _town
wits_.

#urbs, urbis#, f., _a city_; The City (Rome).

#ûrînâtor, ôris#, m., _a diver_.

#ûrna, ae# [#ûrô#], f., _a vessel, urn_ (of baked clay).

#ûrô, ere, ûssî, ûstus#, _to burn_.

  #co# + #amb(i)--combûrô, ere, ûssî, ûstus#, _to burn up, consume_.

  #dê--deûrô, ere, ûssî, ûstus#, _to burn up, consume_.

  #ex--exûrô, ere, ûssî, ûstus#, _to burn up, consume_.

#ûsquam#, adv., _anywhere_.

#ûsque#, adv., _all the way, right on, continuously, even_.

#ûsûrpô, âre, âvî, âtus# [#ûsus# + #rapiô#], _to make use of, enjoy_.

#ûsus, ûs# [#ûtor#], m., _use, employment_; _experience, training_;
_profit, advantage, convenience_.

#ut#, adv., interr., _how? in what way?_ rel., _as, just as_; _since,
seeing that_; #ut . . . ita#, _just as . . . so_.

#ut#, conj., (1) with indic., _when_; #ut prîmum#, _as soon as_;
(2) with subj. of purpose, _in order that, that_; of result, _so that,
that_.

(1) #uter, utris#, m., _leather bag, skin_.

(2) #uter, utra, utrum#, adj., (1) interr., _which of (the) two?_
(2) rel., _whichever one_ (of the two).

#uterque, traque, trumque# [#uter# + #que#], adj., _each_ (of the two),
_both_.

#ûtilis, e# [#ûtor#], adj., _useful, helpful_; _profitable, expedient_.

#ûtilitâs, âtis# [#ûtilis#], f., _profit, advantage_.

#utinam#, adv., _oh that! would that!_

#utique#, adv., _at any rate, surely_; _especially_.

#ûtor, ûtî, ûsus sum#, _make use of, employ_; _enjoy, take advantage
of_; #aliquid ûtendum dare#, _to lend_.

#utpote#, adv., _seeing that, inasmuch as, since_.

#utrimque# [#uterque#], adv., _from_ or _on both sides, on either hand_.

#uxor, ôris#, f., _a wife_.


#V#

#vacô, âre, âvî, --#, _to be empty, be free_ (e.g. from labor), _have
leisure_.

#vacuus# [#vacô#], adj., _empty, unoccupied_.

#vâdô, ere, --, --#, _to go, rush_.

  #ex--êvâdô, ere, vâsî, vâsus#, _to go forth_ or _away_; _get away,
  escape_; _get to be, become_.

  #in--invâdô, ere, vâsî, vâsum#, _to enter_; _attack_; _seize, take
  possession of_.

#vae#, interj., _oh! alas! woe!_

#vâgîtus, ûs# [#vâgiô#, _to cry_], m., _squalling, crying_.

#valeô, êre, uî, itûrus#, _to be well_ or _strong_; _have power_ or
_influence, prevail_.

#Valerius, î#, m., the name of a Roman gens.

  1. _M. Valerius Mâximus Corvînus_. See #Mâximus# (1).

  2. _C. Valerius Catullus_. See #Catullus#.

#valêtûdô, inis# [#valeô#], f., _health_ (good or bad); _good health_;
_sickness_.

#validus# [#valeô#], adj., _strong, stout; powerful_.

#vallês#, or #vallis, is#, f., _valley, vale_.

#vâllum, î#, n., _stockade, rampart, wall_.

#vânus#, adj., _empty, idle_; _ostentatious, vain_.

#varius#, adj., _various, different, diverse_.

#varix, icis#, m., _a dilated vein_.

#Varrô, ônis#, m., _C. Terentius Varrô_, consul in 219 and 216; defeated
at Cannae, with his colleague Paulus.

#Vârus, î#, m., see #Quîntilius#.

#vas, vadis#, m., _bail, security_; _surety_.

#vâs, vâsis# (pl. #vâsa, ôrum#), n., _a vessel, dish_.

#vâstô, âre, âvî, âtus# [#vâstus#], _to lay waste, devastate, destroy_.

#vâstus#, adj., _empty, waste_; _immense, huge_.

#vegetus# [#vegeô#, _to quicken_], adj., _lively, animated_.

#vehementer# [#vehemêns#, _earnest_], adv., _earnestly, seriously,
severely_; _exceedingly_.

#vehô, ere, vexî, vectus#, _to bear, carry, convey_; in pass., with
#nâvî# or #equô#, _to sail, ride_.

  #ad--advehô, ere, vexî, vectus#, _to carry_ or _bring to, bring_.

  #ex--êvehô, ere, vexî, vectus#, _to lift, raise, elevate_.

  #in--invehô, ere, vexî, vectus#, _to carry in_ or _to_; in pass.,
  _ride into, sail to_.

  #prô--prôvehô, ere, vexî, vectus#, _to carry forward_; in pass., _to
  sail, proceed_.

#Vêientês, um#, pl. m., _the people of Veii_, a town in Etruria, about
twelve miles from Rome.

#vel# [old imperative of (1) #volô#], adv. and conj., _even_; _or, or
else_; #vel . . . vel#, _either . . . or_.

#vêlô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to cover up, veil_.

#vêlôcitâs, âtis# [#vêlôx#], f., _speed, swiftness_.

#vêlôx, ôcis#, adj., _swift, fleet, quick_.

#velut# or #velutî#, adv., _just as if, as if_; _ostensibly_.

#vênâbulum, î# [#vênor#], n., _a hunting spear_.

#vênâtiô, ônis# [#vênor#], f., _hunting_; _a hunting spectacle_, in
which wild beasts fought against men, or against one another.

#vêndô, ere, didî, ditus# [contr. from vênumdô], _to sell_.

#venênum, î#, n., _poison_.

#venerâtiô, ônis# [#veneror#], f., _respect, reverence_; _an object of
reverence_ or _awe_.

#veneror, ârî, âtus sum#, _to reverence, worship, revere, respect,
honor_.

#venia, ae#, f., _indulgence, favor, pardon_.

#veniô, îre, vênî, ventum#, _to come, go_.

  #ad--adveniô, îre, vênî, ventum#, _to come to, reach, arrive at,
  arrive_.

  #circum--circumveniô, îre, vênî, ventus#, _to surround, beset_.

  #con--conveniô, îre, vênî, ventus#, _to come together, assemble_;
  with acc., _to meet_; #convenit#, impers., _it is agreed, an
  arrangement is made_.

  #in--inveniô, îre, vênî, ventus#, _to come upon, find, discover_.

  #ob--obveniô, îre, vênî, ventum#, _to come_ or _go to meet_;
  _befall, occur to_; _fall to the lot of_.

  #per--perveniô, îre, vênî, ventum#, _to come to, reach_; _penetrate,
  attain to_.

  #prae--praeveniô, îre, vênî, ventus#, _to come before, get start of,
  anticipate, outstrip_.

  #super--superveniô, îre, vênî, ventum#, _to come to the rescue,
  arrive_.

#vênor, ârî, âtus sum#, _to hunt, chase_.

#venter, tris#, m., _the stomach_.

#ventitô, âre, âvî, --# [freq. of #veniô#], _to come_ or _go often,
resort_.

#ventus, î#, m., _wind_.

#vênumdô, dare, dedî, datus# [#vênum#, _sale_ + #dô#], _to sell_.

#Venusia, ae#, f., a town in Southern Italy, between Apulia and Lucania.

#venustus# [#venus#, _grace_], adj., _charming, graceful_.

#verber, eris#, n., _a lash, whip_; _blow_.

#verbum, î#, n., _a word_; _saying, phrase_.

#vêrê# [#vêrus#], adv., _truthfully, truly_.

#verêcundia, ae# [#vereor#], f., _modesty, shame_; _respect, reverence_.

#vereor, êrî, itus sum#, _to feel awe of, respect_; _fear, be afraid_.

#vêrô# [abl. of #vêrus#], adv., _truly, heartily_; _in truth, indeed,
however, but_.

#verrûca, ae#, f., _a wart, pimple_.

#versiculus# [dim. of #versus#], m., _a little verse_; _a line_.

#versô, âre, âvî, âtus# [freq. of #vertô#], _to twist, turn_; pass., _to
dwell, abide, be_; _employ one's self, conduct one's self_.

#versus, ûs# [#vertô#], m., _a verse, line_.

#vertex, icis# [#vertô#], m., _summit, peak, crest_.

#vertô, ere, î, versus#, _to turn, change_; in pass., _turn about,
return_.

  #ab--âvertô, ere, î, versus#, _to turn away_ or _aside, avert,
  divert_.

  #con--convertô, ere, î, versus#, _to turn round, change_; _turn,
  direct_; _divert, misuse_; #conversus#, _turning_.

  #dis--dîvertô, ere, î, versus#, _to turn away_ or _aside_.

  #ex--êvertô, ere, î, versus#, _to overturn, destroy, ruin_.

  #inter--intervertô, ere, î, versus#, _to turn aside_; _embezzle,
  misappropriate_.

  #re--revertor, î, revertî# or (less often) #reversus sum#, _to
  return_; _revert, recur_.

#vêrum# [#vêrus#], adv., _truly, certainly_; _but_.

#vêrus#, adj., _true, real, genuine_. For #rê vêrâ#, see #rês#.

#vescor, î, --#, _to eat_.

#vesper, erî#, m., _evening_.

#Vesta, ae#, f., the goddess of the hearth, and so of the family and the
state. A fire was kept burning continually in her temple near the Forum,
which six maidens, called Vestals, watched in turn, since the Romans
believed that the maintenance of this fire was closely connected with
the continuance of their state. The Vestals were not allowed to marry
during their term of office.

#vester, tra, trum# [orig. #voster#; cf. #vôs#], poss. pron. adj.,
_your, yours_.

#vêstibulum, î#, n., _vestibule, entrance_.

#vêstîgium, î#, n., _footstep, footprint_.

#vestis, is#, f., _clothing, garments_; _a robe_.

#veterânus# [#vetus#], adj., _old, veteran_. As noun, #veterânî, ôrum#,
pl. m., _veteran soldiers, veterans_.

#vetô, âre, uî, itus#, _not allow, forbid_.

#vetus, eris#, adj., _old, aged_; _of a former time, ancient_.

#vexô, âre, âvî, âtus# [freq. of #vehô#], _to shake_; _trouble,
disturb_.

#via, ae#, f., _highway, road_; _passage, march, journey_.

#vicârius, î# [#vicis#], m., _a substitute, proxy_.

#vîcêsimus# [cf. #vîgintî#], num. adj., _twentieth_.

#vîciês# [cf. #vîgintî#], num. adv., _twenty times_.

#vîcînus# [#vîcus#], adj., _neighboring, near_.

(#vicis#), #is# (nom. wanting), f., _alternation, change, succession_;
#in vicem#, _in turn_.

#victor, ôris# [#vincô#], m., _conqueror, victor_; as adj.,
_victorious_.

#victôria, ae# [#victor#], f., _victory_.

#vîcus, î#, m., _a street_; _village, town_.

#vidêlicet# [#vidêre# + #licet#], adv., _you see, clearly_; _of course,
that is_.

#videô, êre, vîdî, vîsus#, _to see, perceive, understand_; in pass.,
_seem_.

  #in--invideô, êre, vîdî, vîsus#, _to look askance at, to envy_.

#vigil, vigilis#, adj., _wakeful, alert_; as noun, _a watchman,
sentinel_.

#vigilantia, ae# [#vigil#], f., _wakefulness, vigilance, watchfulness_.

#vigilia, ae# [#vigil#], f., _wakefulness_; _a watch_ (a fourth part of
the night).

#vîgintî#, indecl. num. adj., _twenty_.

#vîlicus, î# [#vîlla#], m., _overseer, steward_.

#vîlla, ae#, f., _a country house, villa_.

#vîminâlis, e# [#vîmen#, _an osier_], adj., _of osiers_; as noun,
#Vîminâlis, is#, m. (sc. #collis#), _the Viminal Hill_, one of the seven
hills of Rome.

#vinciô, îre, vinxî, vinctus#, _to bind, fetter_.

#vincô, ere, vîcî, victus#, _to conquer, defeat_; _surpass_; intrans.,
_prevail_.

  #dê--dêvincô, ere, vîcî, victus#, _to conquer completely, subdue_.

#vinculum, î# [#vinciô#], n., _a bond_; in pl., _bonds, chains, jail_.

#vindex, icis#, m., _champion, protector_.

#vindicô, âre, âvî, âtus# [#vîs# + #dîcô#], _to claim_; _protect_;
_avenge_; _punish_.

#vînum, î#, n., _wine_.

#violentus# [#vîs#], adj., _violent, impetuous_.

#violô, âre, âvî, âtus# [#vîs#], _to injure_; _dishonor, outrage_.

#vir, virî#, m., _a man, hero_; _husband_.

#vîrês#, see #vîs#.

#virga, ae#, f., _a rod, scourge_.

#Virgînia, ae#, f., the maiden whose attempted enslavement by Appius
Claudius led to the downfall of the Decemvirs, B.C. 449.

#Virgînius, î#, m., _L._, the father of Virginia, consul in B.C. 449.

#virgô, inis#, f., _young girl, maiden, virgin_.

#virîlis, e# [#vir#], adj., _manly_.

#virîtim# [#vir#], adv., _man by man, singly, individually_.

#virtûs, ûtis# [#vir#], f., _manliness, strength, bravery_; _ability_.

#vîs#, gen. and dat. wanting, acc. #vim#, abl. #vî#, f., _strength,
force_; _hostile force, violence_; _quantity, number_; pl., #vîrês#,
_energy, vigor, resources_; #vim facere#, _to use violence_.

#vîsô, ere, î, us# [freq. of #videô#], _to go to see, visit_.

#vîsus, ûs# [#videô#], m., _appearance, vision_.

#vîta, ae# [cf. #vîvô#], f., _life_.

#vitium, î# [#vieô#, _to twist_], n., _a fault, failing, vice_.

#vituperandus# [gerundive of #vituperô#], adj., _blameworthy_.

#vituperâtiô, ônis# [#vituperô#], f., _censure, criticism_.

#vituperô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to blame, censure_.

#vîvô, ere, vîxî, vîctum#, _to live_.

  #super--supervîvô, ere, vîxî, --#, _to live beyond, outlive,
  survive_.

#vîvus# [#vîvô#], adj., _living, alive_; of water, _running_.

#vix#, adv., _with difficulty, hardly, scarcely_.

#vôciferor, ârî, âtus sum# [#vôx# + #ferô#], _to cry out, shout,
exclaim_.

#vocitô, âre, âvî, âtus# [freq. of #vocô#], _to call repeatedly_ or
_loudly_.

#vocô, âre, âvî, âtus# [cf. #vôx#], _to call, summon, name_.

  #ab--âvocô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to call off_, or _away_.

  #ad--advocô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to call to_ (one), _summon_; _call
  together_.

  #con--convocô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to call together, summon_.

  #ex--êvocô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to call forth_ or _out, summon_.

  #prô--prôvocô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to call forth, challenge_;
  _appeal to_.

  #re--revocô, âre, âvî, âtus#, _to call back, call again, recall_.

#volitô, âre, âvî, --# [freq. of (2) #volô#], _flit about_; _fly,
hasten_.

(1) #volô, velle, voluî, --#, _to wish_; _be willing_; _be minded,
determine_.

(2) #volô, âre, âvî, âtûrus#, _to fly_.

  #ab--âvolô, âre, âvî, --#, _to fly_ or _hasten away_.

  #dê--dêvolô, âre, --, --#, _to fly down, fly_.

#Volscî, ôrum#, pl. m., an ancient tribe living in the southern part of
Latium, finally subdued by the Romans in B.C. 338.

#volucer, cris, cre# [(2) #volô#], adj., _flying, winged_; as noun, f.
(sc. #avis#), _a bird_.

#volûmen, inis# [#volvô#, _to roll_], n., _roll of writing, scroll,
volume, book_.

#voluntârius# [#voluntâs#], adj., _of free will, voluntary_.

#voluntâs, âtis# [(1) #volô#], f., _will, wish, desire, inclination_.

#voluptâs, âtis#, f., _pleasure, enjoyment_.

#vôs#, see #tû#.

#vôtum, î# [#voveô#], n., _a vow, wish, prayer_.

#voveô, êre, vôvî, vôtus#, _to promise solemnly, vow, dedicate_.

  #dê--dêvoveô, êre, vôvî, vôtus#, _to consecrate, doom, devote_.

#vôx, vôcis#, f., _voice, sound, tone_; _cry, call_; _saying, speech_.

#vulgâris, e# [#vulgus#], adj., _commonplace, ordinary, vulgar_.

#vulgô# [#vulgus#], adv., _commonly, popularly, generally_.

#vulgus, î#, n., _the masses, multitude, the common people_.

#vulnerô, âre, âvî, âtus# [#vulnus#], _to wound, hurt, injure_.

#vulnus, eris#, n., _a wound_; _blow, misfortune_.

#vultur, uris#, m., _a vulture_.

#vultus, ûs#, m., _the expression of the face, features, countenance_.


#X#

#Xanthippus, î#, m., a Spartan general by whose aid the Carthaginians
defeated Regulus in B.C. 255.

#Xenophôn, ôntis#, m., _Xenophon_, an Athenian general and author, who
lived about B.C. 440-350.

#Xerxês, is#, m., a king of Persia, defeated by the Greeks at Salamis
B.C. 480.


#Z#

#Zama, ae#, f., a city in Numidia, near Carthage.

#zôna, ae#, f., _a girdle, belt_; _money belt_.




REFERENCES TO HARKNESS' COMPLETE LATIN GRAMMAR

To accompany Arrowsmith and Knapp's Viri Romae


Page   Note

  1     4  489
        5  568
        6  446, 2

  2     7  429
        8  639
       10  476
       18  622

  3     2  649, II.
        4  418
       10  595
       11  480
       14  533, 4
       15  532, 3

  4     1  475
        6  477, I.
       12  598

  5     3  590
        6  205, 2
       14  396, 2
       20  633

  6     1  646
       16  615

  7     7  600, II.
       16  642
       17  473, 2
       20  565

  8     5  462

  9     6  568

 10     2  430
        6  429
        9  570
       15  417
       18  471

 12     1  417
        5  605, I.
       23  454

 13    10  652, 1

 14    13  568, 7
       15  440, 1 and 2

 15     3  484, 2

 16     6  559, 1

 17     4  427
       11  451, 1

 18     4  584
       17  440, 3

 19    15  424

 20    11  603, 2
       12  426

 21     8  611, 1
       14  473, 2
       15  666, 2

 23     8  467

 24     9  478
       12  565

 25     6  433
        7  483

 27     3  489, 1
        6  588, II.
       16  430

 28     7  457
        9  425, 4, N.
       13  484, 2

 30     2  441
        3  426, 2

 31     1  592, 1
        9  559, 1
       11  576

 33     2  454
       13  426

 34     2  426

 35     2  489
        6  497, 4

 36     8  456
       10  477, I.
       18  476, 1

 37     4  477, III.

 38     1  497 and 1
       12  567

 39     4  595, 1
       12  479

 41    10  473, 3

 42     5  399, 5

 44     2  428, 3

 47    12  579 and N.

 48     4  481
        5  499

 49     4  83, 5
        7  561, 2

 51     6  626, 3

 53    12  451, 2

 54     8  473, 2, N. 1
        9  416, 2

 62     5  591, 4
        9  565, 4

 63     5  642, 4

 66     4  556

 67     4  448, 1

 70     2  581, 1

 72     8  592

 73     5  591, 1

 74     5  470, 1

 75    10  456, 3

 76     4  432

 85     6  474, 2, N. 1

 86     7  586, II.

 87     7  587

 90     2  535, 1

112     3  468

114     2  429
        3  426, 1
        4  434
        6  378, 2

115     1  378

118     4  486

120     7  431

123     2  426, 2
        7  440, 5

124     1  598

129     1  451, 1


       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *
       *       *       *       *       *


Harkness's New Latin Grammars


=A COMPLETE LATIN GRAMMAR=

  Cloth-leather binding. 12mo, 464 pages    =$1.25=

=A SHORT LATIN GRAMMAR=

  Cloth-leather binding. 12mo, 254 pages    =.80=

  By ALBERT HARKNESS, Ph.D., LL.D., Professor Emeritus in
  Brown University.

These new text-books are the crowning triumph of a life-work which has
made the name of their author familiar to classical scholars and
teachers everywhere. They represent the latest advances in philological
science, and embody the results of the author's large experience in
teaching and of his own linguistic studies, together with the
suggestions and advice of eminent German specialists in the field of
Historical and Comparative Grammar. The peculiar qualities of
simplicity, clearness, and adaptation of treatment to the practical
needs of the student and of the class room,--qualities that have always
characterized the Harkness Grammars,--have been preserved and even
intensified in these new books.

The Complete Latin Grammar is designed at once as a text-book for the
class room and a book of reference for the student. It aims not only to
present systematically for the benefit of the beginner the leading facts
and laws of the Latin language, but also to provide accurately for the
needs of the advanced student.

The Short Latin Grammar is published for the benefit of those who prefer
to begin with a more elementary manual, or those who do not contemplate
a collegiate course. In the preparation of this work the convenience and
interest of the student have been carefully consulted. The paradigms,
rules, and discussions have in general been introduced in the exact form
and language of the Complete Latin Grammar by which it may at any time
be supplemented. The numbering of the sections in the two books is also
alike.


_Copies of the books will be sent, prepaid, to any address on receipt of
the price by the Publishers_:

  =American Book Company=
  =New York · Cincinnati · Chicago=




LATIN PROSE WRITING

  =With Full Introductory Notes On Idiom=

  By MAURICE W. MATHER, Ph.D.
  Formerly Instructor in Latin in Harvard University

  and ARTHUR L. WHEELER, Ph.D.
  Instructor in Latin in Yale University

  =Half Leather, 12mo, 216 pages    Price $1.00=


The present book furnishes all the essential material for the writing of
average passages in Latin Prose. It is not intended to teach how to
write isolated sentences, illustrative of given constructions, but the
book assumes that the pupil, after a year or more of such practice, is
ready to learn the art of writing connected narrative in Latin. The
authors have based their exercises on Caesar's Gallic War Books III and
IV, Nepos's Alcibiades and Hannibal, and Cicero's Manilian Law and
Archias, inasmuch as these are not only models of good style, but are
usually read in schools. As the book is not for beginners, the
individual exercises have not been made vehicles for teaching any one or
two constructions, but the authors have felt at liberty to introduce at
any time even the more difficult constructions; indirect discourse, for
instance, being taken up at the very beginning.

While, in general, the vocabulary and the constructions for any exercise
are supplied in the Latin text on which the given exercise is based, yet
enough variation from the language of the model is required to give the
pupil abundant practice in handling forms and constructions. By this
means the pupil's power of observation is increased, his interest is
quickened by the pleasure of discovery, and he will remember the word
much better than if he found it ready at hand in a dictionary.

A number of recent examination papers from various colleges have been
inserted in the belief that they will be found useful for sight tests
and occasional examinations. The notes accompanying some of the papers
belong to the original examinations. At the end of the book are indexes
of words and constructions, and of English words and phrases with
references to sections of the Notes on Idiom in Part I.


_Copies sent, prepaid, to any address on receipt of the price._

  =American Book Company=
  =New York · Cincinnati · Chicago=




PEARSON'S ESSENTIALS OF LATIN FOR BEGINNERS

  BY
  HENRY C. PEARSON
  Horace Mann School, Teachers' College, Columbia University

  Cloth, 12mo, 320 Pages
  Price, 90 Cents


This book is designed to prepare pupils in a thorough fashion to read
Caesar's Gallic War. It contains seventy lessons, including ten that are
devoted exclusively to reading, and six supplementary lessons. The first
seventy lessons contain the minimum of what a pupil should know before
he is ready to read Latin with any degree of intelligence and
satisfaction. The supplementary lessons deal largely with certain
principles of syntax that some teachers may not wish to present to their
pupils during the first year's work. They are independent of one another
and of the rest of the book, and may therefore be taken up in any order
that the teacher wishes, or any number of them may be omitted.

The work contains many features and pedagogical improvements which will
commend themselves to teachers of first year Latin. Various
simplifications in statement are introduced, and throughout the greatest
care has been taken to preserve scientific accuracy while enunciating
principles in the simplest forms.




  AMERICAN BOOK COMPANY
  NEW YORK · CINCINNATI · CHICAGO




_Revised Edition_

VIRGIL'S AENEID

  With an Introduction, Notes, and Vocabulary by #HENRY S. FRIEZE#, late
  Professor of Latin in the University of Michigan. Revised by #WALTER
  DENNISON#, Professor of Latin in the University of Michigan.

  First Six Books       $1.30
  Complete      $1.50
  Complete Text Edition      $0.50

#This Work# differs in many respects from the former edition. Such
changes and alterations have been introduced as are necessary to make
the book conform to modern demands, and many important additions have
also been made.

#The Introduction# has been enlarged by the addition of sections on the
life and writings of Virgil, the plan of the Aeneid, the meter,
manuscripts, editions, and helpful books of reference.

#The Text# has been corrected to conform to the readings that have
become established, and the spellings are in accord with the evidence of
inscriptions of the first century A.D. To meet the need of early
assistance in reading the verse metrically, the long vowels in the first
two books are fully indicated.

#The Notes# have been thoroughly revised and largely added to. The old
grammar references are corrected and new ones (to Harkness's Complete,
Lane & Morgan's, and Bennett's Grammars) added. The literary
appreciation of the poet is increased by parallel quotations from
English literature. The irregularities of scansion in each book are also
given with sufficient explanations.

#The Vocabulary# has been made as simple as possible and includes only
those words occurring in the Aeneid. The parts of compound words are not
indicated separately when they appear unmodified in the compound form.
The principal parts of verbs are given which are understood to be in
actual use.

#The Illustrations# for the most part are new and fresh, and have been
selected with great care with a view to assisting directly in the
interpretation of the text. There are also maps showing the wanderings
of Aeneas, the vicinity of Cumae, and pre-historic Rome, and a full-page
facsimile of one of the best manuscripts of Virgil, the Codex Palatinus.

  #American Book Company, Publishers#




#CICERO'S ORATIONS#

AND SELECTIONS FROM THE LETTERS

  Edited By

  WILLIAM R. HARPER, Ph.D., D.D., LL.D.
  President of the University of Chicago

  and

  FRANK A. GALLUP, A.M.
  Professor of Latin, Colgate Academy

  =Half Leather, 12mo, 566 pages, with Maps and Illustrations.
  Price, $1.30=


This edition of Cicero contains in addition to selected letters all the
orations required by all the colleges throughout the country. It is
intended to be distinctly practical and aims solely to meet the needs of
secondary and preparatory schools.

  =The Orations= have been arranged in the order in which it is
  thought they can be read to the best advantage and include, besides
  the four against Catiline, those for Archais, Milo, Marcellus, and
  Ligarius, Pompey's Commission, and the Fourteenth Philippic.

  =The Letters= have been selected with special reference to their
  fitness for reading at sight and for this purpose they have no equal
  in Roman literature.

  =The Introduction= includes a well balanced life of Cicero with a
  just estimate of his standing and character and many helpful
  features which will give the student a comprehensive knowledge of
  Roman life and politics.

  =The Notes= suggest rather than tell the student and help him to
  get, instead of getting for him, that acquaintance with the orator
  and with the language which is the result of true study.

  =The Vocabulary= shows great care and thoroughness and meets the
  requirements of the average student.

  =The Maps= are accurate and drawn especially for this work and the
  Illustrations are happily chosen to illustrate both text and time.


  _Copies sent, prepaid, to any address on receipt of the price._

  =American Book Company=
  =New York · Cincinnati · Chicago=




LATIN LITERATURE OF THE EMPIRE

  =Selected and Edited with Revised Texts and Brief Introductions=

  By ALFRED GUDEMAN, Ph.D.
  Associate Professor of Classical Philology,
  University of Pennsylvania

  =In Two Volumes. Cloth, 12mo.  Per Volume, $1.80=

  VOL. I--PROSE. Selections from Velleius, Curtius, Seneca
  Rhetor, Justinus (Trogus Pompeius), Seneca, Petronius, including
  Cena Trimalchionis, Pliny the Elder, Quintilian, Tacitus, Pliny the
  Younger, Suetonius, Minucius Felix Octavius, Apuleius--Ammianus
  Marcellinus, and Boethius.

  VOL. II--POETRY. Pseudo Vergiliana, Aetna, Manilius,
  Calpurnius, Nemesianus, Phaedrus, Lucan, Valerius Flaccus, Seneca,
  the Octavia (anonymous), Persius, Statius, Silius Italicus, Martial,
  Juvenal, Pervigilium Veneris, Ausonius, and Claudianus.


The works of Latin Literature of the post-Augustan period have hitherto,
with a few notable exceptions, been virtually excluded from the
classical curricula of colleges and universities.

The present collection has been made primarily for the use of students
in higher classes in colleges. The selections will be found useful as
collateral reading in connection with lectures on classical literature,
and will also furnish suitable material for sight reading.

The selections themselves contain nothing that is not eminently worthy
of perusal. They are in every case sufficiently extensive to give a
continuous and coherent story, which at the same time exhibits the
author at his best. The text follows the best modern editions, the
deviations from the standard texts being briefly recorded in critical
appendices.


  _Copies sent, prepaid, to any address on receipt of the price._

  =American Book Company=
  =New York · Cincinnati · Chicago=




INTRODUCTION TO THE STUDY OF LATIN INSCRIPTIONS

  By JAMES C. EGBERT, Jr., Ph.D.
  Adjunct Professor of Latin, Columbia University

  =Half Morocco, large 12mo, 468 pages. With numerous illustrations and
  exact reproductions of inscriptions    Price, $3 50=

This work is designed as a text-book for the use of students in
Universities and Colleges, and also to furnish an account of this branch
of archaeological study for general readers. It has been prepared in the
belief that a knowledge of epigraphy forms an essential part of the
equipment of a teacher of the classics, and that the subject itself has
become so important as to justify its introduction, in elementary form
at least, into the curriculum of undergraduate studies.

A distinctive feature of the book is the number and character of its
illustrations,--there being over seven hundred cuts and diagrams of
inscriptions, for the purpose of illustrating the text, and for practice
in reading. Of these, over one hundred are photographic reproductions,
showing the forms of the letters and the arrangement of the
inscriptions. The work is also supplied with an exhaustive bibliography
and valuable tables of abbreviations, archaisms, etc.


_Copies of Egbert's Latin Inscriptions will be sent, prepaid, to any
address on receipt of the price by the Publishers:_

  =American Book Company=
  =New York · Cincinnati · Chicago=




FIRST LATIN READINGS

An Equivalent for Caesar

  by

  ROBERT ARROWSMITH, Ph.D.

  and

  G. M. WHICHER, M.A.

  Instructor in Classics, Packer Collegiate Institute, Brooklyn, N.Y.

  =Cloth, 12mo, 344 pages. Price, $1.25=

This work has been prepared in response to a growing demand for a new
first reading book in Latin, offering more simple and interesting
material for the second-year work than is now provided by Caesar's
Commentaries, the first connected reading pupils meet in the Latin
course.

It is the aim of the present volume to offer for the student's first
reading in Latin, material in which the least difficult Latin comes
first; which contains the largest possible general vocabulary, instead
of a small special vocabulary; which is drawn from a wide, instead of a
narrow, range of literature; and which may be associated with other
departments of teaching with greater success and productiveness than
Caesar's Commentaries.

The selections in First Latin Readings have, therefore, been chosen with
reference to their difficulty, their interest as literature, and, as far
as possible, their relation to Roman life and custom, and not with
reference to their exclusive use as drilling material on formal
classical construction.

Exercises in Latin prose composition, based on the text of each author
represented, have been prepared, and are included in the book.

_Copies of First Latin Readings will be sent, prepaid, to any address on
receipt of the price by the Publishers:_

  =American Book Company=
  =New York · Cincinnati · Chicago=




LATIN DICTIONARIES


=HARPER'S LATIN DICTIONARY=

  Founded on the translation of "Freund's Latin-German Lexicon."
  Edited by E. A. ANDREWS, LL.D. Revised, Enlarged, and in great
  part Rewritten by CHARLTON T. LEWIS, Ph.D., and CHARLES SHORT, LL.D.

Royal Octavo, 2030 pages    Sheep, =$6.50=; Full Russia, =$10.00=

The translation of Dr. Freund's great Latin-German Lexicon, edited by
the late Dr. E. A. Andrews, and published in 1850 has been from that
time in extensive and satisfactory use throughout England and America.
Meanwhile great advances have been made in the science on which
lexicography depends. The present work embodies the latest advances in
philological study and research, and is in every respect the most
complete and satisfactory Latin Dictionary published.


=LEWIS'S LATIN DICTIONARY FOR SCHOOLS=

  By CHARLTON T. LEWIS, Ph.D.

  Large Octavo, 1200 pages    Cloth, =$4 50=; Half Leather, =$5.00=

This dictionary is not an abridgment, but an entirely new and
independent work, designed to include all of the student's needs, after
acquiring the elements of grammar, for the interpretation of the Latin
authors commonly read in school.


=LEWIS'S ELEMENTARY LATIN DICTIONARY=

  By CHARLTON T. LEWIS, Ph.D.

  Crown Octavo, 952 pages. Half Leather    =$2.00=

This work is sufficiently full to meet the needs of students in
secondary or preparatory schools, and also in the first and second
years' work in colleges.


=SMITH'S ENGLISH-LATIN DICTIONARY=

  A Complete and Critical English-Latin Dictionary. By WILLIAM SMITH,
  LL.D., and THEOPHILUS D. HALL, M.A., Fellow of University College,
  London. With a Dictionary of Proper Names.

  Royal Octavo, 765 pages. Sheep    =$4.00=


_Copies sent, prepaid, to any address on receipt of the price._

  =American Book Company=
  =New York · Cincinnati · Chicago=




GREEK DICTIONARIES


=LIDDELL AND SCOTT'S GREEK-ENGLISH LEXICON=

  Revised and Enlarged. Compiled by HENRY GEORGE LIDDELL, D.D., and
  ROBERT SCOTT, D.D., assisted by HENRY DRISLER, LL.D. Large Quarto,
  1794 pages. Sheep      =$10.00=

The present edition of this great work has been thoroughly revised, and
large additions made to it. The editors have been favored with the
co-operation of many scholars and several important articles have been
entirely rewritten.


=LIDDELL AND SCOTT'S GREEK-ENGLISH LEXICON--Intermediate=

  Revised Edition. Large Octavo, 910 pages.

    Cloth, =$3.50=; Half Leather, =$4.00=

This Abridgment is an entirely new work, designed to meet the ordinary
requirements of instructors. It differs from the smaller abridged
edition in that it is made from the last edition of the large Lexicon,
and contains a large amount of new matter.


=LIDDELL AND SCOTT'S GREEK-ENGLISH LEXICON--Abridged=

  Revised Edition. Crown Octavo, 832 pages. Half Leather =$1.25=

This Abridgment is intended chiefly for use by students in Secondary and
College Preparatory Schools.


=THAYER'S GREEK-ENGLISH LEXICON OF THE NEW TESTAMENT=

  Being Grimm's Wilke's Clavis Novi Testamenti. Translated, Revised,
  and Enlarged by JOSEPH HENRY THAYER, D.D., LL.D. Royal Quarto,
  727 pages    Cloth, =$5.00=; Half Leather, =$6.50=

This great work embodies and represents the results of the latest
researches in modern philology and biblical exegesis. It traces
historically the signification and use of all words used in the New
Testament, and carefully explains the difference between classical and
sacred usage.


=YONGE'S ENGLISH-GREEK LEXICON=

  By C. D. YONGE. Edited by HENRY DRISLER, LL.D.

  Royal Octavo, 903 pages. Sheep    =$4.50=


=AUTENRIETH'S HOMERIC DICTIONARY=

  Translated and Edited by ROBERT P. KEEP, Ph.D. New Edition.
  Revised by ISAAC FLAGG, Ph.D.

  12mo, 312 pages. Illustrated. Cloth    =$1.10=


_Copies sent, prepaid, to any address on receipt of the price._

  =American Book Company=
  =New York · Cincinnati · Chicago=


       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *
       *       *       *       *       *


Errors and Inconsistencies (noted by transcriber):

_Main Text_

  page 3: Rômulus statim armâtîs[3] pâstôribus  [armâtis]
  Footnote 2.18 ... See p. xviii, E 4, H 622 ... B 337, 7, 2.
    [E 4. H 622 ... B 337, 7, 2).]
  Footnote 3.4 ... B 182, 1, _a_;  [B 182, 1, _a_);]
  Footnote 10.13: _sepeliô_  [_final . missing_]
  Footnote 18.13: Cf. p. 3, n. 2.  [cf.]
  Footnote 18.14 ... quod in mente concêpî?_'  [_close quote missing_]
  page 23: Incidit[10] dê uxôribus mentiô  [de]
  Footnote 28.9: dat. of reference  [dat of]
  page 29: nî faciat,[16]  [faciât]
  Footnote 29.16 ... vî (tê) abstraham  [te]
  Footnote 39.4 ... H 595, 1 (504, 3, 2)  [(504, 3, 2))]
  page 41 Inde Rômam dê permûtandîs captîvîs  [captîvis]
  page 48: nê Rôma opprimî posset  [ne]
  Footnote 44.2 ... Cf. H 428, 3 (385, 4, 3):  [(385, 4, 3))]
  page 63: deinde positîs ante vêstibulum dônîs  [vêstibulûm]
  Footnote 59.6: #haud piget#: sc. _mê_  [sc. _me_]
  page 72: vênit ad eum lîctor  [âd]
  page 74: Cum aedem Honôris  [aêdem]
  Footnote 85.1 ... #prîmum . . . triumphâvit#  [primum]
  Footnote 85.6 ... (419, III, 1, 1)  [(419, III, 1, 1))]
  page 88: sêriô dîxit Caesar mâlle  [mâllê]
  page 96: [Illustration: CICERÔ]  [CICERO]
  page 100 Sed Antônius, initâ cum Octâviânô societâte,[5]  [Sêd]
  Footnote 98.17: 'conspicuous'; lit., 'shining.'
    [_first open quote missing_]
  page 106: aspidem[14] sibi adferendam cûrâvit  [13]

_Glossary_

  #ad#, prep. with accus. ... (3) of purpose  [_missing (3)_]
  #cônfodiô#, see #fodiô#.  [#cônfodiô#.]
  #ad--addîcô, ere, dîxî, dictus#  [addîcô, êre]
  #bis# [orig. #duis#; cf. #duo#], num. adv., _twice_.
    [_close parenthesis for bracket_]
  #Falernus# ... _a famous wine-growing district in Campania_.
    [_printed as shown, with anomalous italics_]
  #implôrô, âre, âvî, âtus#  [âvî âtus]
  #integer, gra, grum# ... #integer, â#  [integer â]
  #îrâtus# [orig. part. of #îrâscor#]  [orig part.]
  #per--perliciô, ere, lexî, lectus#,  [_missing , after "lectus"_]
  #inquam# ... See #297#, II, 2: 144, _b_: _175_, 2.
    [_reference printed as shown_]
  #introeô#, see (1) #eô#.  [_final . missing_]
  #latebra, ae#,  [_missing , after "ae"_]
  #multô, âre, âvî, âtus# [#multa#], _to fine, punish_.  [âre âvî]
  #per--permûtô, âre, âvî, âtus#  [âre, âvi]
  #ôrdior, îrî, ôrsus sum#, _to begin_.  [îrî ôrsus]
  #ad--adôrô, âre, âvî, âtus#  [ad adôrô]
  #persuâdeô#, see #suâdeô#.  [#persuâdeô# see]
  #dê--dêcutiô, ere, cussî, cussus#  [dê dêcutiô]
  #ex--êrumpô, ere, rûpî, ruptum#,  [_missing , after "ruptum"_]
  #sôpiô, îre, îvî (iî), îtus#  [îro, îvî]
  #spernô, ere, sprêvî, sprêtus#  [spernô, êre]
  #superô, âre, âvî, âtus# [#superus#]  [âre, âvi]
  #re--retrahô, ere, trâxî, trâctus#,  [trâctus#.]
  #vindicô, âre, âvî, âtus#  [âre, âvi]

_References to Harkness_

  90  2  535, 1  [_missing 1_]

_Advertising_

Format of prices (usually $4.50, sometimes $4 50) is unchanged.

  sight tests and occasional examinations.  [_final . missing_]
  VOL. I--PROSE. ... Seneca Rhetor, Justinus  [Rhetor. Justinus]
  [last page]
  _Copies sent ... on receipt of the price_.  [_final . missing_]








*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SELECTIONS FROM VIRI ROMAE ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


