The Project Gutenberg eBook of The man who saved New York
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The man who saved New York

Author: Ray Cummings

Illustrator: Milton Luros

Release date: September 19, 2025 [eBook #76899]

Language: English

Original publication: Holyoke, MA: Columbia Publications, Inc, 1943

Credits: Roger Frank


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MAN WHO SAVED NEW YORK ***

[Illustration]

                    The Man Who Saved New York

                          By Ray Cummings


        Porky’s ego wouldn’t stay in his own body, and
        that, believe it or not, was what saved the city!


Of course, as you know, I didn’t figure in the excitement over the
Green Giant. The newspapers and the radio boys never mentioned me, or
Lisbeth, or Baldy or even Porky Jenks. Why would they? We have kept
strictly silent about the whole affair. Not from shyness; none of us
are against a little wholesome publicity. But it never does one any
good to be billed as a first class candidate for the nut-house. So that
Green Giant who waded around in the ocean off Sandy Hook will remain a
mystery.

Not that I can actually explain him. I can’t. He’s as much a mystery to
me as to anybody else. But, as it happened, there probably never would
have been any Green Giant at all if it hadn’t been for me. I don’t mind
telling the real facts, but I think it’s quite a bit safer for them
just to go as fiction. You can take them or leave them, so to speak.

And there’s another angle to the thing. The war actually would have
been won by now--if Lisbeth hadn’t queered it. Hitler would have been
smashed and everything would have been just swell. I had it all
planned--and then Lisbeth put the jinx on it. I’m sorry about that. But
you’ll realize there’s not a thing I could have done.

The queer affair began last Spring--a warmish afternoon when I was
sitting in my study trying to figure out a plot. Porky Jenks came in to
see me. I used to know Porky quite well, but hadn’t seen him for a
couple of years. He was a likeable young fellow, always with a ready
laugh which is what made him so fat, I suppose. But this was a
different Porky. He wedged himself down, collapsing in my only
armchair. His clothes were rumpled as though he’d slept in them; his
collar was wilted, hanging soggily on his bulging throat. His thin
sandy hair was plastered on his sweating forehead; he pulled out a big
blue handkerchief and mopped his face and just stared at me with pale
blue eyes that looked haunted.

“Well, well, Porky, glad to see you,” I said. “How are you?”

“I’m awful,” he declared. Just out of habit, I suppose, he tried to
laugh, but it was only a wan, sickly grin. “There’s--something the
matter with me, Ray. Something terrible. That’s why I’ve come to you,
see? You’re up on all that nutty stuff--the bizarre, the queer, the
unbelievable--”

“Oh,” I said.

He stared at me with that haunted look. “Listen,” he said, “do I look
crazy? Insane? A maniac? Tell me I’m not, Ray.”

“You’re not,” I said. “Cheer up. What have you been doing with
yourself? Last I heard you were just finishing college.”

“I’m a hardware salesman. Retail trade. That is, I was, but what with
the war and all, it’s no good.”

“Tough luck,” I said.

“It’s just as well. Walking so much made my feet hurt--they just
wouldn’t stand it.” He sighed heavily. “Maybe that’s why I’m in 4-F,
too. That and my weight--my heart. But that’s nothing serious--”

“Oh well, that’s fine,” I agreed. “But now--you’ve got some other
trouble?”

                 *       *       *       *       *

The haunted look came back into his earnest eyes. “I’ll have to tell
you,” he agreed. “After all, that’s what I came here for.” He gulped.
“Listen,” he said, “hang onto yourself--you’ll get a shock. The thing
hit me just about a week ago. Like a bolt from the blue--I didn’t have
any warning at all. I was feeling perfectly all right, honest.”

“What hit you?” I prompted.

“I was just sitting by the window of my boarding house room.” His voice
had that awed, solemn tone like you use telling a ghost story. “When
all of a sudden I wasn’t myself at all. I was sitting in the chair all
right--I knew that. But also I was a man walking down the street past
my window.”

“You were--what?”

“A man walking past my window,” he repeated drably. “A perfectly
strange man--and I was worried because I was late getting home and my
wife’d give me hell. I was henpecked, scared to death of her, see?”

“No, I don’t see,” I declared.

His fat hands made a hopeless gesture. “Well, that’s what I mean, Ray.
You think I’m crazy. That’s why I can’t go see a doctor. He’d just slam
me into an asylum or something.” His chubby hands reached out and
gripped my arm. “Listen--you’ve got to believe me. Anyway--I can show
you--give you a demonstration--it’s easy enough.”

“Is it?” I said.

“Sure it is. You see, my ego, id, personality or something, doesn’t
seem to want to stay put in my body any more. It--it wants to wander--”

“Let’s get this straight,” I interrupted. “You say you suddenly usurped
the mind and body of some strange man walking down the street--”

“Yes, that’s it! Usurpsed! That’s a good word, Ray. I was sort of
conscious that he was confused, too--my usurping him that way. He kind
of resented it for a second or two--and then I guess he went blank.
Anyway, I was in full control--”

“And what did you do? With him, I mean.”

“Oh. Well, I remember I decided I wouldn’t bother going back to my
wife--his wife, I mean.”

I could only nod.

“So I went into a Bar and Grill and started to absorb whiskeys and soda
and to the devil with his wife.”

“And then?” I prompted.

“Well, I can remember getting pretty blurry eventually. Seems like I
was telling the bartender all my secret thoughts about the wife.” He
smiled wryly. “And then I--well, you can’t blame me, Ray--it occurred
to me I might be getting into some sort of jam. So I just--withdrew.”

“Withdrew?”

“I gave that little fellow back his body,” Porky said. He shrugged.
“What else could I do? I just jerked myself back to my own body--in the
chair by the window, see?”

For a minute I couldn’t think of anything to say. I’ve juggled with
weird things like that for years--but strictly on paper, you
understand. Now, meeting one in real life gave me a creepy feeling.
Because Porky was telling me the truth. I wouldn’t doubt it. He was
plainly about frightened out of his wits.

“You say you can do this any time you like?” I said at last.

“Sure I can. That’s just the trouble--sometimes it’s almost
involuntarily, if I’m dozing, half asleep for instance, I just seem
suddenly to slip into it. I got into a nasty jam just last night.”

He waited for me to ask him, what? But I just stared at him.

                 *       *       *       *       *

“Seems a man and his wife were having a big argument--the room over me
in my boarding house,” he went on. “I could hear them. I don’t know
what possessed me but all of a sudden I decided to take the wife’s
part. So I did. She was a little woman, but when my--my personality got
control of her--she’d always been meek, see? Afraid of the big bruiser,
see? Well, anyway, it seems I changed all that in a hurry--” Porky
smiled weakly. “Sort of hard to explain--”

“I get what you mean. Go on.”

“Well, the little woman took a few socks at him which surprised him--”

“I should think it might,” I commented.

“And just as he was socking back at her--”

“You withdrew?”

“Yes--yes I did. And that’s what worries me too, Ray. Not just for
myself--this damned thing, see? It can work injustice to other
people--”

“Easily,” I agreed. “That henpecked husband getting home drunk, for
instance.”

“That’s what I mean.” He was still gripping my arm and his hands were
shaking. “Ray, listen--a fellow oughtn’t to be able to do a thing like
this. It’s not normal, is it?”

“No,” I admitted. “No--certainly not exactly normal. But you’re not
sick, Porky? Nothing seems to be the matter with you--except this, of
course?”

“No. If I wouldn’t be so scared I guess I’d feel all right.” He
shuddered. “But what am I going to _do_? Want me to show you how the
thing works? It’s easy enough. Let’s look out your window here. You
just pick out anybody--anybody at all--”

                 *       *       *       *       *

It was just then that Lisbeth and Baldy Green walked in on us. Lisbeth
is my daughter. She’s a nice girl. And good looking--a mop of unruly,
wavy brown hair, and a figure with curves in all the right places. She
wants to be a career girl--a news photographer, newspaper reporter of
the sob sister style maybe, with a big by-line and write feature
articles; and maybe hold down the City Desk job and publish the
newspaper. A few little odds and ends like that. Baldy is a cartoonist
on one of the big dailies. Middle aged, with a wife and six kids. A
good friend of mine; and he had just gotten Lisbeth a job on his paper.
Neither he nor Lisbeth had ever met Porky Jenks. I introduced them now.
And then--because you had to do something to explain Porky’s frightened
aspect--and maybe I didn’t look too normal either--I thought I’d better
explain the problem in hand.

Well, as you can imagine, Lisbeth and Baldy were pretty nonplussed. And
skeptical. But Porky, more gloomy than ever at all this discussion,
waved away their doubts.

“Then let me show you,” he declared. “Pick anybody out there on the
street. Anybody at all.” He shoved his armchair up to my open window,
with us three standing around behind him.

“Will it--will it hurt him?” Lisbeth asked.

“It won’t hurt Porky,” I said. “But it might very easily hurt the other
fellow.” I must admit the thing had me pretty jittery. I could begin to
see the possibilities of what might happen. The hazards, so to speak. I
gripped Porky by the shoulder. “Now listen,” I told him. “You’ve
evidently had a lot of luck so far. You haven’t killed anybody, have
you?”

He gulped. “Killed anybody? Oh my heavens no! How could I--”

“Listen--suppose while you--er--have possession of some
stranger--suppose you got killed?” I suggested. “Or committed suicide
for instance?”

“Oh please--please be careful,” Lisbeth put in.

“It isn’t Porky I’m worried about, it’s the other fellow,” I said.
“Look here, Porky--it only takes you a second to--withdraw, as you put
it?”

“Why--yes. Less than that, maybe. Instantaneous maybe--”

“And so you’d be sitting here in your chair, but the other fellow would
be dead.”

“Don’t quibble,” Baldy said. “Let’s see him do it. That’s the important
part.” Baldy also has a good imagination, which is why his cartoons are
so successful. “If he can do a thing like that, it’s a gift,” Baldy
added with mounting enthusiasm. “Why, we can capitalize on it in a
thousand ways--maybe make a fortune--”

“I just want to get rid of it,” Porky said. “But here goes--just so you
won’t think I’m crazy.”

Well, he showed us, all right. A meek-looking old woman with a shawl
over her head and an umbrella under her arm happened to come along, and
at the busy intersection just under my window she stood looking
confused, as though afraid of the traffic.

“Try her,” Baldy suggested. “She looks like a weak character. You can
take possession of a weak one better, can’t you?”

“Doesn’t seem to make any difference,” Porky said. “All right, she’ll
do. Now just watch. Keep your eyes on her.”

We were all of us pretty tense, I guess. I recall that I was trying to
watch the old woman, and Porky simultaneously. There was the old woman,
standing on the corner, nervously waiting for the light to change; and
then when it did, she seemed afraid to start across because cars were
turning from the side street. And here in his chair, Porky just took a
good, intense look at his victim. That was queer too. I saw a sort of
predatory look jump into his pale blue eyes. And then he sat back in
his chair with a hand up to his forehead.

                 *       *       *       *       *

Then it happened. Down on the corner the old woman seemed to start; for
a second she looked dazed; I think she gave a twitch. Here in the chair
was a thud. That was Porky’s head falling back inert against the chair;
and there he lay, motionless, in a trance. Lisbeth noticed him and gave
a frightened little gasp.

“He’s all right,” I murmured.

“Shut up,” Baldy admonished. “Look--oh migosh, look at the old woman!”

She was something to look at, no argument on that. The light had
changed back, but that didn’t stop her. With imperious, if shaking
steps, she strode out from the curb, holding up a hand to stop the
traffic. By some miracle nothing hit her. And at the exact center of
the intersection she stopped.

“Oh-h,” I heard Baldy murmur. “She’s gonna direct the traffic!”

That undoubtedly was her general idea. She had the closed umbrella
gripped in her hand, holding it over her head as she gestured for the
cars to stop, or come forward. It was quite a sight. And in a minute or
two there were a lot of sounds --cars honking, the drivers yelling; the
grinding, bumping crash of a couple of minor collisions. How long it
went on I have no idea. I was pretty scared. The vague impulse came to
me that I ought to give Porky’s inert body a shake to rouse him; but I
didn’t dare. What that would have done, heaven only knows. Anyway, down
in the street policemen were coming on the run. The scene down there
was quite a mess, with that old woman still vigorously telling the
traffic what it ought to do. Nothing had yet hit her. Then the
policemen reached her; gripped her. The vague thought struck me that
Porky would probably think this the proper time to withdraw. Evidently
he did. I saw the old woman stiffen and then go limp in the policemen’s
arms; and here in the chair Porky gave a twitch, with his head coming
up, his eyes open staring at me, and a nervous smile on his lips.

That was all there was to it. Just as simple as that.... Porky was the
first of us to speak.

“Well, there you are,” he said.

“How’d it work?”

“Take a look,” I told him.

He looked. “See?” he said. “That’s what I mean. I got her in trouble
and I didn’t intend it, honest.”

Beyond any doubt the old woman was in trouble. Four policemen were
telling her off; and then a radio car came and they bundled her into
it.

“That’s tough,” Baldy murmured. “How’s she gonna explain it? She’ll
wind up in Bellevue.”

“Well, he didn’t intend it,” Lisbeth said. Then she turned on me. “Why
don’t you go down there and do something about it? Get her off--you can
just tell them--”

“Not me,” I said. “You go. And I’ll come to the asylum and try and get
you out. This whole thing is crazy, and anybody connected with it--”

“It may be crazy, but it works,” Baldy declared. “Listen, you lugs,
don’t you realize what we’ve got? A gold mine! Fame! Fortune! Why
listen, we’ll put Porky in the movies--”

“I don’t want to go in the movies,” Porky said. “I just want to get rid
of--”

“He doesn’t have to if he doesn’t want to,” Lisbeth put in.

“That’s silly,” I told Baldy. “What would it look like in the movies?
Like nothing. Just trick photography.”

“Well then, vaudeville,” Baldy declared. “The scientific wonder of the
age. He takes possession of various people in the audience--”

“Wouldn’t _that_ make a hit with them!” I retorted.

“It would not!”

“I’ll bet we could get a thousand a week for it,” Baldy insisted.

“I won’t do it,” Porky said. “I’d wind up in the insane asylum, or in
jail. Listen, I came here to see Ray, just to ask him would he
please--”

                 *       *       *       *       *

It was then that the big idea came to me. The war! Money is a wonderful
thing, but what with all the publicity the war gets, naturally it’s on
your mind even more than money. How could we use Porky’s gift to help
with the war? I’ve always had a vivid imagination, and this thing
seemed suddenly to give it an immense stimulus. Lisbeth was about to
tell Baldy and me again that Porky didn’t have to do anything he didn’t
want to do, but I silenced her.

“Look here, Porky,” I demanded, “why did you make that old woman direct
traffic?”

“I dunno, it just occurred to me. When I was a kid I always wanted to
be a policeman when I grew up.”

“That’s it!” Baldy exclaimed. “His subconscious! You see--”

I interrupted him. “Porky, listen, could you take possession of somebody
who’s out of sight?”

“Sure I could,” he agreed readily. “Remember? I told you--that woman in
the room above me, arguing with her husband. I couldn’t see them.”

“All right. Now then, could you--” Baldy interrupted me. He happened to
be looking out the window. Down the street from me there’s an
Undertaking Parlour, with a Neon sign of ghastly green. “Say,” he
exclaimed, “here’s a thought! I wonder could he take possession of a
corpse, for instance? There’s probably one over there in that
Undertaker’s place. Suppose he made it come walking out! Think of how
wonderful it would--”

“I’m thinking about it and I won’t do it,” Porky declared.

“I should say not,” Lisbeth agreed. “Dad, listen, he’s told you ten
times all he wants is to--”

“Don’t be gruesome,” I told Baldy. “I’m thinking of something
important.”

“Like what?” Lisbeth demanded.

“The war,” I said. “I’ve got it all worked out.”

I told them. And I must say, it sounded even more feasible, telling it,
that it did thinking it up. Nazi submarines are always lurking off our
coast. We know that.

“Like this,” I said. “We go down near Sandy Hook. Porky doesn’t
actually have to see his victim--that’s been demonstrated. So he just
mentally selects one of the lurking submarines and takes possession of
its Commander.”

“Do I?” Porky said.

“You do.”

“And _then_ what do I do?”

“You have him run his submarine up on the shore and smash it,” I told
him enthusiastically. “Maybe the crew would get suspicious and stop
you? If they did--then all you have to do is open valve and sink the
sub. Or blow it up with one of its own torpedoes. I’m no expert on
submarines, but don’t you see, when you’re the Commander you’ll know
all about them. No trouble at all to find a dozen ways of blasting the
whole thing to smithereens.”

“And kill himself, too,” Lisbeth murmured. “Dad, I thought you had
better sense than--”

“Not at all,” I explained. “In one split second he jumps out to the
safety of his own body which is with us on shore. That’s been
demonstrated. Why, the thing’s perfect. One sub gone. Then he jumps
into another one! And another! The Battle of the Atlantic is the big
hitch in our war effort. You know that. Why, this will--”

                 *       *       *       *       *

Baldy was beginning to get the bigness of my idea. “It’s perfect!” he
exclaimed. “Why, listen, when Hitler finds his subs just aren’t coming
back, he’ll be afraid to send any more out! Then we can get busy on the
Japs. Take a Jap battleship, for instance. Or a Jap General, ordering
all his men in the wrong direction! What chaos! What a cinch for our
forces--”

“Well, I won’t do it,” Porky said. “It just wouldn’t work and I won’t
do it.”

“Why wouldn’t it work?” I demanded. “Lisbeth, stop trying to tell me he
doesn’t have to do what he doesn’t want to do. He does have to. This is
too important a thing--”

“It might work with just the first submarine,” Porky admitted. “But how
do I know I can jump out of the Commander’s body with everything
exploding around me? I never tried anything like that. Suppose I
calculate it wrong and I’m dead before I jump. How do I know whether I
can jump out of a dead body or not? I never tried it--”

That made Baldy mad. “Listen, you big hunk of junk,” he said, “are you
going to put your own personal safety ahead of a chance to win the war
for Uncle Sam?”

“More than just a chance--practically a sure thing,” I agreed.

“That’s because you and Baldy aren’t taking the chance,” Lisbeth put
in. “You two are safe and he gets killed. For just one submarine. It’s
suicide--just plain suicide and I won’t let him do it.”

“All right, I’ll try it,” Porky said suddenly. “I’m no coward, if you
go and put it that way. Only I sure hope it works.”

I patted him on the back. “Good boy. That’s the stuff. Now listen,
everybody, this thing will have to be kept absolutely secret, of
course.”

“Of course--definitely,” Baldy agreed.

“We’ll just go ahead and do it and say nothing,” I went on. “The war
will be won in a hurry--and why it got won will be the mystery. Who
cares, so long as we win it?”

Well, we planned the thing for about an hour. It was so simple, though,
there really wasn’t much planning to do. We decided that about eleven
o’clock that same night, we’d all go quietly down near Coney Island or
somewhere and go to work on the first sub that came within Porky’s
range. The range was an unknown quantity, of course. But, so far as any
of us could figure, there wasn’t any reason why Porky’s astral body
couldn’t jump a mile--ten miles, for instance--just as well as from my
window down into the street.

“Well, let’s go to dinner,” I said at last.

“I was thinking I would take Lisbeth to dinner,” Porky said. “Just to
talk things over, you know.” He gazed at Lisbeth with sort of shy
confusion I expect you’d call it, and she gazed back.

“I’d like that,” Lisbeth said. “Come on, let’s go.”

“And you be back here by eleven o’clock promptly,” I warned.

“Yes, of course--sure we will,” Porky agreed.

“Because the war depends on you.”

“Should you go A. W. O. L.,” Baldy put in--and he didn’t smile when he
said it--“I will personally see that you get put into an insane asylum
for the rest of your natural life.”

                 *       *       *       *       *

It occurred to me to mention that Porky could jump out of an insane
asylum without much trouble, but I decided to keep that thought to
myself. Lisbeth and Porky departed with more promises; and Baldy and I
had dinner and loafed around discussing the thing, waiting impatiently
for eleven o’clock. About quarter past eleven Lisbeth and Porky came
back. You’d have thought they might have spent the evening soberly
discussing the weird, dangerous things into which Porky was about to
plunge. Not at all. They had been to a double-feature movie--“Love’s
Lingering,” and “Passion’s Pretty Flowers,” or something like that.
They were very happy about it. But they sobered down when I mentioned
that Porky had the fate of the war on his hands; and by the time we got
down to the seashore Porky was looking a little white around the gills.

“I sure hope this thing works,” he said weakly.

“Of course it will,” Baldy and I assured him. We sat him down on the
sand. It was a lonely stretch, with the waves rolling up in long
rhythmic lines of white and the open sea a deep purple with leaden
clouds overhead and a wan moon trying to break through.

“Now then, make yourself comfortable,” I told Porky as we stretched him
out on the sand. “We’ll be right here by you all the time.”

That didn’t seem to comfort him much. “I sure hope this thing works,”
he said.

With the fate of the war at stake, I sure hoped so myself; but I wasn’t
going to express any doubts about it. Baldy and I sat down and lighted
up our pipes.

“Just keep your mind on the nearest submarine Commander,” I said. “And
then jump into him and go to work. Then--withdraw. You’ll be back here
with us instantaneously and we’ll start you right off again, it’s a
cinch,” I assured him.

“I sure hope so,” he agreed.

“Nazi submarine Commander,” Baldy put in with sudden thought. “There
might be a U. S. sub out there, Porky. Now listen--don’t you get this
thing mixed--”

“It’s just plain suicide--that’s what it is,” Lisbeth murmured
resentfully. But Baldy and I silenced her.

And then Porky went to work. He was stretched on the sand with head and
shoulders propped up by his elbows behind him. We all held our breaths.
For a minute or two Porky just stared moodily out at the purple sea.
Concentrating. Lisbeth was sitting beside him; she seemed afraid to
look at him.

“I won’t let him do it,” she muttered.

“Shut up,” Baldy growled. “You’ll break the spell.”

Then suddenly Porky gave a twitch. His body stiffened, then went limp.
There was a little thud as his head and shoulders fell back onto the
sand. Lisbeth gave a suppressed cry. Baldy and I exhaled; and then went
back to puffing at our pipes. You’ve got to have poise in a thing like
that; take it in stride, so to speak.

“Well, he’s at work,” Baldy murmured at last. “Pretty soon we ought to
be getting results.”

“Yes,” I agreed. “I’ll bet those Nazi sailors on the sub are getting
kind of surprised, just about now.”

I could picture it. A startled wonderment spreading around the sub at
the queer actions of the Commander. Or maybe the whole thing was
exploding just about now.

More time passed. On the sand beside us Porky’s body lay inert. You
could hardly tell that he wasn’t dead. I could feel Lisbeth’s gaze
roving Baldy and me as though we were a couple of murderers. Then all
of a sudden Lisbeth gave a sharp, startled cry.

“Oh, my heavens! Look! Look there!”

We all saw it at once. Out in front of us, half a mile out maybe, the
purple sea suddenly heaved up. There was a great cascade of water out
of which a monstrous dark green shape rose towering two or three
hundred feet into the air. The Green Giant! There he was. How can I
describe him? I can’t. Not adequately, because he was too awesome, too
weird, too incredible--but there he was. A great green man-shape.

                 *       *       *       *       *

The pallid moonlight shone on him--a green giant who must have been
five or six hundred feet tall. He was wading waist deep in the
water--wading, not at us, thank heavens, but parallel to the beach,
toward Sandy Hook by the entrance to New York Harbor. The moonlight
shone on his glistening torso--green scales and a slimy sea-look as
though algae and barnacles might be clustered on it. A Green Giant
almost in human form. Anyway, I remember that he had a browny chest
that bulged out over the ocean surface; wide thick shoulders and
monstrous arms that dangled down into the water as he strode forward,
with a line of white waves churning at his waist. I saw his face
plainly. You couldn’t call it human, but that was its general idea. He
was breathing through his mouth now with a snort that was a gruesome
rumbling roar; but I could see that he had gills or some such apparatus
in the sides of his neck.

For a minute maybe Baldy and I and Lisbeth must have just sat there
stricken, numb, with the body of Porky beside us. And then suddenly an
immense amount of amazing things began to happen all more or less
simultaneously. In the town behind us the air-raid siren began wailing.
Then searchlights from several spots on shore sprang like great waving
silver swords in the sky. Then, far out to sea there was the drone of
planes.

An air raid! New York City being raided by Nazi planes! The Green Giant
had nothing to do with the first alarm here on shore. It was planes
coming in from the ocean. We heard them; and in a few seconds we saw
them--four of them, flying low; Nazi planes--the moonlight disclosed
it. Who am I to try to picture exactly what happened next? It was quite
a chaos. All I can remember is that one of the planes swerved low
pretty close over the Green Giant. I imagine that Nazi pilot was sort
of startled--can you blame him? Anyway, suddenly the giant let out a
bellow of anger; his hand reached up a hundred feet or so over his head
and grabbed the plane--seized it, crunched it maybe and then flung it
away. The plane was a long finger of yellow-red flames as it fell
hissing into the sea.

I recall I heard Baldy mutter: “Ah--good work! Very neat!”

Good work! That tipped me off. I admit that in all the chaos the main
fact had not yet occurred to me. You’ve guessed it. Porky! By some
mischance for Hitler, quite evidently Der Fuehrer had selected this
particular night for his threatened bombing of New York. Here were his
bombing planes--four of them. And there was Porky, in the person of
that astonishing green giant, going to work on them. Those Nazi pilots
evidently got rattled. They gave up their ideas of heading up the bay
and for a moment were circling here like a flock of confused birds.
They were too far away now for Porky to clutch at them, so he stooped.
One of his hands came up out of the sea with a monstrous dripping
boulder. He flung it, and another plane crashed.

There was worse than chaos out in front of us now. A lot of our own
planes were coming, interceptors that went like wasps after the two
remaining Nazis. One of Hitler’s prides seemed to be shot down; and
Porky accounted for the other one--that green giant leaped into the air
with a marvelous standing high jump, grabbed the Nazi plane with both
hands and tore it into bits. But now a new element entered into the
thing. Hitler evidently had a few subs around here. One of them
obviously let loose a couple of torpedos at the giant. Distinctly I saw
two explosions at the giant’s waistline--torpedos that must have gone
right into him and exploded inside. Anyway, he doubled up with a
bellowing roar of pain that rattled our ear-drums and then he went
down, sinking with a cataclysmic rush of white waves over him.

I recall my fleeting thought that this would be just the proper time
for Porky to withdraw. And he did. As the green giant fell and
disappeared, the body of Porky here on the sand gave a convulsive
shudder and in another instant Porky was sitting up, blinking, with a
hand rubbing his forehead, and the other hand shoving away Lisbeth who
was clutching at him.

“W-well,” Porky said. “Here you are. What happened?”

“Plenty,” I said. “A very great deal. But you did fine, Porky.”

                 *       *       *       *       *

Baldy was on his feet, holding off Lisbeth who was struggling to get at
Porky. “Say, listen, you lug,” Baldy demanded, “where in the devil did
you ever pick up that giant? It happened to work out all right, but--”

“Why--I dunno,” Porky said. “He was just lying around down there--”

“On his way in from Atlantis maybe?” Baldy was sarcastic.

“I dunno. I was concentrating on a sub Commander--how bestial they
are--you know, that sort of stuff--and all of a sudden I sort of slid
into that giant.” Porky shuddered. “It was--horrible. But--when I saw
those Nazi planes, I did my best.”

“You did wonderful,” I agreed.

“You saved New York from maybe a nasty air raid. Now listen, the U-boat
Commanders are still out there. All we have to do--”

“If we had any sense we’d be getting out of here before we get into
_real_ trouble,” Lisbeth observed suddenly.

I could see that she had something there. This section of the beach was
no longer lonely. Spectators were beginning to mill around; and there
were Coast Guards, with searchlights darting at us, and planes roaring
overhead.

“Come on, let’s duck,” I agreed. “We’ll come back tomorrow night when
things have quieted down a bit.”

Baldy and I planned it enthusiastically all the way back to the city.
Barring the sudden advent of green giants and such, the thing obviously
was absolutely simple. We four could tour all the coasts. And then
maybe arrange to get abroad. I figured three months--if Porky could
hold out--would wind up the war.

That next day, Baldy and I made charts in regular military fashion,
outlining our exact plan of campaign. We didn’t see Porky or Lisbeth
that afternoon, or evening. They had wanted to have dinner together
again, but had promised faithfully to report at my study by eleven
p.m. They came, right on the dot. And they were both beaming.

“Well,” I said. “Here you are. That’s fine. And you look in good shape
for a swell night’s work, Porky.”

“Yes, sir,” Porky agreed. “I’m all right. But you see,
sir--there’s--er--something we want to tell you.”

That “sir” sounded sort of queer, but I admit I didn’t get the idea.

“He loves me and I love him and so it’s all settled,” Lisbeth said.

I saw that Baldy looked startled. What I looked like I don’t know.
“What’s all settled?” I demanded.

“Us--er--we’re engaged,” Porky stammered. “That is--”

“It absolutely is,” Lisbeth beamed. “He loves me and I love him.
Definitely.”

To say that I was nonplussed would be putting it mildly. But I have
always prided myself on having a true sense of values. What’s the
problem of a daughter compared to the problem of winning the war?
Nothing. Nothing at all.

“Well, we’ll talk about that later,” I decided firmly. “Right now we’ve
got a war on our hands. Come on, let’s get going.”

But Porky didn’t look at all as thought he were ready to start. “Well,”
he said, “that’s another thing I--er--have to tell you.” He looked very
pleased. “I haven’t got it any more. I’ve lost it.”

Baldy came to life. “What’s _that_ mean?” he demanded. “What in the
devil haven’t you got any more? What have you lost?”

“My--my gift--that’s what you called it,” Porky said. “It’s gone.
Vanished. I can’t do it any more. I tried--honest I did--but it’s
gone.”

Lisbeth made an expressive gesture like one who wants to indicate that
a fairy has just flown out the window.

“He tried,” she said. “He really did.”

“I’m no coward,” Porky added. “Didn’t I do fine last night? But it’s
gone--I’m quite normal now.” He said that last with a very evident
relish.

“Because now your soul and heart and ego and such are all tied up with
Lisbeth,” Baldy said sarcastically.

“That’s it,” Lisbeth retorted. “And you don’t need to be sarcastic
about it. He and I figured it all out--why would his ego want to roam
abroad when it’s in my keeping--forever?” She and Porky were holding
onto each other’s hands and gazing with that dying calf look. “He
belongs to me now,” Lisbeth added. “His ego doesn’t want to go
adventuring. Besides, if it did, I wouldn’t let it.”

And there you are. I’m sorry about not being personally able to win the
war, but you can see, there wasn’t a thing I could do about it.


[Transcriber’s Note: This story appeared in the July 1943 issue
of _Science Fiction Stories_.]




*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MAN WHO SAVED NEW YORK ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


